Documentation:
Welcome to Vast.ai:
<content>Vast.ai
Vast.ai is a marketplace for affordable GPU cloud computing. We make it easy for anyone to:
Spin up GPU instances in seconds at competitive prices.
Scale across thousands of GPUs from Secure Cloud datacenters or community providers.
Launch prebuilt or custom templates with one click.
How It Works
Vast.ai connects compute providers — from hobbyists to Tier-4 datacenters — with users who need GPUs. Our search engine lets you filter by GPU type, RAM, CPU, bandwidth, and more, while providers retain full control over pricing and contracts.
Get Started
Quickstart Guide
Launch your first GPU instance in minutes with our step-by-step guide
GPU Instances
Overview
Learn about GPU instances, containers, and compute options
Pricing
Understand marketplace pricing and cost optimization strategies
Find & Rent
Search and rent the perfect GPU for your workload
Connect
Access instances via SSH, Jupyter, or web portal
Common Tasks
Templates Guide
Learn about pre-built environments and customization
Data Movement
Transfer files to and from your instances
Reserved Instances
Save up to 50% with long-term commitments
Manage Instances
Start, stop, and monitor your GPU rentals
Mission
Vast.ai’s mission is to align and democratize AI. Machine learning is progressing towards powerful AI systems with the potential to radically reshape our future. We believe it is imperative that this awesome power be distributed widely; that its benefits accrue to the many rather than the few; that its secrets are unlocked for the good of all humanity. Towards these ends we work to ensure that the compute powering AI is supplied by the people and for the people.
Talk to Us
Support Chat → Available 24/7 in the bottom-right corner of our console.
Email → contact@vast.ai
Discord → Join our community for help and discussions.
Documentation → Browse our instances guide, templates documentation, or troubleshooting tips.</content>
QuickStart:
<content>This Quickstart will guide you through setting up your Vast.ai account and running your first instance in just a few steps.
1. Sign Up & Add Credit
Create an account on vast.ai.
Verify your email address.
Go to Billing → Add Credit and top up using credit card, BitPay, or Crypto.com.
Learn about autobilling to avoid interruptions.
Your balance appears at the top right of the dashboard.
Before you can rent a machine or create a team, you must verify your email address. After signing up, check your inbox (and spam folder) for the verification email and click the link inside. You can resend the verification email anytime from Settings → Resend Verification Email. Learn more about teams and instance management.
2. Prepare to Connect
For SSH access: generate an SSH key pair following our complete SSH guide and upload your public key in Keys page or via account settings.
For Jupyter access: download and install the provided TSL certificate following our Jupyter setup guide (needed for secure browser access).
If you don’t install the provided browser certificate:
Windows / Linux – You’ll see a “Your connection is not private” privacy warning. You can still connect by clicking Advanced → Proceed, but the warning will appear every time.
macOS – Browsers will block Jupyter until you install and trust the provided certificate in Keychain Access. Without it, you won’t be able to connect.
Installing the certificate once removes the warning permanently.
3. Pick a Template & Find a Machine
Browse Templates for pre-built setups (e.g., PyTorch, TensorFlow, ComfyUI) or create custom templates.
Go to Search and filter by GPU type, count, RAM, CPU, network speed, and price. Learn about search filters and instance types.
Disk Space is Permanent. The disk size you choose when creating an instance cannot be changed later. If you run out of space, you’ll need to create a new instance with a larger disk. Learn about storage types and volumes. Tip: Allocate a bit more than you think you need to avoid interruptions.
Click Rent when you find a match. Consider reserved instances for 50% savings on long-term projects.
Wait for the instance to start—cached images launch quickly, fresh pulls may take 10–60 minutes. Check instance status for progress.
Click Open button to access your instance via your chosen connection method.
4. Manage or End Your Instance
Use Stop to pause GPU billing (storage still accrues charges). Learn about the instance lifecycle.
Use Delete when finished to stop all charges. See data movement if you need to save data first.
Common Questions
What is a minimum deposit amount?
The minimum deposit amount on Vast.ai is $5.
What happens when my balance runs out? Can I avoid interruptions?
When your balance reaches zero, your running instances will automatically stop. To avoid this, you can enable autobilling on the Billing page. Set an auto-charge threshold higher than your average daily spend, so your card is automatically charged when your balance falls below that amount. We also recommend setting a low-balance email alert at a slightly lower threshold to notify you if the auto-charge fails for any reason. Learn more about billing management and cost optimization.
How can I customize a template?
You can create a new template from scratch, or you can edit an existing template. You can find a guide here. See also template settings and advanced setup for more customization options. Learn about managing templates for organizing your template library.
Next Steps
Instances Overview
Complete guide to GPU instances, types, and management
Instance Pricing
Marketplace pricing, instance types, and saving strategies
Templates Introduction
Pre-built environments, customization, and Docker setup</content>
FAQ:
Overview:
<content>Browse our frequently asked questions organized by topic.
General
Platform basics, advantages, and how Vast.ai works
Instances
Creating, managing, and configuring GPU instances
Rental Types
On-demand vs interruptible instances and pricing
Jupyter & SSH
Connecting to instances via Jupyter and SSH
Billing
Details about billing, pricing, and balance notifications
Security
Data protection and platform security
Technical
DLPerf scores, Docker, and advanced topics
Networking
Configuring port mapping on your templates</content>
General:
<content>What is Vast.ai?
Vast.ai is a cloud computing, matchmaking, and aggregation service focused on lowering the price of compute-intensive workloads. Our software allows anyone to easily become a host by renting out their hardware. Our web search interface allows users to quickly find the best deals for compute according to their specific requirements.
How does Vast.ai work?
Hosts download and run our management software, list their machines, configure prices, and set any default jobs. Clients then find suitable machines using our flexible search interface, rent their desired machines, and finally run commands or start SSH sessions with a few clicks.
What are Vast’s advantages?
Vast.ai provides a simple interface to rent powerful machines at the best possible prices, reducing GPU cloud computing costs by ~3x to 5x. Consumer computers and consumer GPUs, in particular, are considerably more cost-effective than equivalent enterprise hardware. We are helping the millions of underutilized consumer GPUs around the world enter the cloud computing market for the first time.
What is the Secure Cloud filter?
The “Secure Cloud (Only Trusted Datacenters)” filter shows only vetted datacenter providers. These partners have their equipment in certified locations that are current with ISO 27001 and/or Tier 3/4 standards.
Vast.ai has verified that this equipment is in these facilities and that their certifications are up to date. For sensitive or production workloads, we recommend checking the “Secure Cloud” filter. Look for the blue datacenter label.
What operating systems are provided?
Vast currently provides Linux Docker instances only, mostly Ubuntu-based. We do not support Windows.
What interfaces are available?
Currently, Vast.ai provides:
SSH access for terminal/command line control
Jupyter for notebook interfaces with GUI
Command-only instance mode for automated workloads
Instance Portal for web-based access
We do not provide remote desktop interfaces.</content>
Instances:
<content>Instance Lifecycle
What does “Lifetime” mean on my instance?
Every offer has a maximum rental duration. When you rent an instance, the offer end date at the time of rental becomes your rental end date — the date your instance will run until. This rental end date is locked when you rent and cannot be changed by the host. When the rental end date is reached, the rental contract expires and the instance is stopped.
The host can extend the rental contract by moving the offer end date forward, but this is at their discretion and only applies if they choose to do so. Important: Always assume your instance will be lost once the lifetime expires and copy out any important data before then.
How can I restart programs when my instance restarts?
For custom command instances: Your command runs automatically on startup.
For SSH instances: Place startup commands in /root/onstart.sh. This script runs automatically on container startup.
# Example /root/onstart.sh
#!/bin/bash
cd /workspace
python train.py --resume
Environment Configuration
How do I set environment variables?
Use the -e Docker syntax in the docker create/run options:
-e TZ=UTC -e TASKID="TEST"
To make variables visible in SSH/Jupyter sessions, export them to /etc/environment:
# Export variables with underscores
env | grep _ >> /etc/environment

# Or export all variables
env >> /etc/environment
You can also set global environment variables in your account Settings page.
How do I get the instance ID from within the container?
Use the VAST_CONTAINERLABEL environment variable:
echo $VAST_CONTAINERLABEL
# Output: C.38250
How can I find OPEN_BUTTON_TOKEN?
SSH into your instance or open Jupyter terminal and run:
echo $OPEN_BUTTON_TOKEN
Alternatively, check the instance logs.
Controlling Instances
How do I stop an instance from within itself?
A special instance API key is pre-installed. Install the CLI and use it:
# Install CLI
pip install vastai

# Test with start (no-op if already running)
vastai start instance $CONTAINER_ID

# Stop the instance
vastai stop instance $CONTAINER_ID
If $CONTAINER_ID is not defined, check your environment variables with env.
Can I run Docker within my instance?
No, Vast.ai does not support Docker-in-Docker due to security constraints. Each Docker container must run on a separate instance.
Data and Storage
Can I change disk size after creating an instance?
No. Disk size is permanent and cannot be changed after instance creation. If you run out of space, you’ll need to create a new instance with a larger disk.
Tip: Always allocate more space than you think you need to avoid interruptions.
What happens to my data when an instance stops?
Stopped instances: Data persists, storage charges continue
Destroyed instances: All data is permanently deleted
Lifetime expired: Instance stops, data remains until destroyed
Always backup important data to external storage.</content>
Rental Types:
<content>Rental Type Overview
We currently offer three rental types:
On-Demand (High Priority)
Fixed price set by the host
Runs as long as you want
Cannot be interrupted
More expensive but reliable
Reserved (High Priority)
Discounted rates with pre-payment
Same priority as on-demand
Convert from existing on-demand instances
Up to 50% discount based on commitment length
For detailed information, see Reserved Instances.
Interruptible (Low Priority)
You set a bid price
Can be stopped by higher bids
Saves 50-80% on costs
Good for fault-tolerant workloads
How do interruptible instances compare to AWS Spot?
Similarities:
Both can be interrupted
Both offer significant savings
Differences:
Vast.ai uses direct bidding (you control your bid price)
AWS uses market pricing
No 24-hour limit like GCE preemptible instances
Vast.ai instances can run indefinitely if not outbid
What happens when my interruptible instance loses the bid?
Your instance is stopped (killing running processes). Important considerations:
Save work frequently to disk
Use cloud storage for backups
Instance may wait long to resume
Implement checkpointing for long jobs
When using interruptible instances, always design your workload to handle interruptions gracefully.
DLPerf Scoring
What is DLPerf?
DLPerf (Deep Learning Performance) is our scoring function that estimates performance for typical deep learning tasks. It predicts iterations/second for common tasks like training ResNet50 CNNs.
Example scores:
V100: ~21 DLPerf
2080 Ti: ~14 DLPerf
1080 Ti: ~10 DLPerf
A V100 (21) is roughly 2x faster than a 1080 Ti (10) for typical deep learning.
Is DLPerf accurate for my workload?
DLPerf is optimized for common deep learning tasks:
✅ CNN training (ResNet, VGG, etc.)
✅ Transformer models
✅ Standard computer vision
⚠️ Less accurate for unusual compute patterns
⚠️ Not optimized for non-ML workloads
For specialized workloads, benchmark on different GPUs yourself. While not perfect, DLPerf is more useful than raw TFLOPS for most ML tasks.</content>
Jupyter & SSH:
<content>Jupyter
What is the HTTPS security warning?
When accessing Jupyter, browsers show a security warning because we use self-signed certificates. To fix:
Download and install our TLS certificate
Windows/Linux: Can bypass by clicking Advanced → Proceed
macOS: Must install certificate in Keychain Access
Installing the certificate removes the warning permanently.
Why are Jupyter transfers slow?
Jupyter’s upload/download is not optimized for large files. Alternatives:
Use SCP/SFTP for large transfers
Use cloud storage (S3, GCS)
Use the Vast CLI copy commands
Zip multiple files before downloading
How do I delete files in Jupyter to free space?
Jupyter moves deleted files to trash. To permanently delete:
# In Jupyter terminal
rm -r ~/.local/share/Trash
How do I run Colab notebooks?
Select the PyTorch template with Jupyter enabled
Start your instance
Download the Colab notebook as .ipynb
Upload to Jupyter
Install any missing dependencies with pip install
For direct Colab connection, see our Colab guide.
How do I download multiple files from Jupyter?
Jupyter Lab: Shift-click to select multiple files, right-click to download
Jupyter Notebook: Must download individually or zip first:
# Install zip
apt-get install -y zip

# Zip a directory
zip -r all_files.zip /path/to/files/
Missing library or package errors?
Install dependencies in Jupyter terminal:
# System packages
apt-get install -y PACKAGE_NAME

# Python packages  
pip install PACKAGE_NAME
SSH Access
How do I connect via SSH on Linux/Mac?
Generate an SSH keypair:
ssh-keygen -t rsa
Load the key and verify:
ssh-add
ssh-add -l
Get your public key:
cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub
Copy the entire output (including ssh-rsa prefix and user@host suffix) to your Keys section
Example of complete SSH key:
ssh-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1yc2EAAAADAQABAAZBAQDdxWwxwN5Lz7ubkMrxM5FCHhVz... bob@velocity
How do I connect via SSH from Windows?
Two options:
Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) - Follow Linux/Mac instructions above
PuTTY - See our Windows SSH Guide
Make sure to save the key in SSH RSA-2 format when using PuTTY.
What is tmux and how do I use it?
We connect you to a tmux session by default for reliability. Common commands:
Create new terminal: Ctrl+b, c
Switch terminals: Ctrl+b, n
Split screen: Ctrl+b, % (vertical) or Ctrl+b, " (horizontal)
Search “tmux cheat sheet” for more commands.
Can I disable tmux?
Not recommended (SSH can be unstable), but if needed, add to your onstart:
touch ~/.no_auto_tmux
SSH asks for a password - what’s wrong?
There is no SSH password - Vast.ai uses SSH key authentication only. If SSH asks for a password:
Your SSH key wasn’t added correctly to your account
You didn’t copy the entire public key (must include ssh-rsa prefix and user@host suffix)
Your SSH client is misconfigured
The private key isn’t loaded in your SSH agent
Double-check that you copied the complete public key to your Keys section.</content>
Billing:
<content>How does billing work?
Once you enter a credit card and an email address and both are verified you can then increase your credit balance using one-time payments with the add credit button. Whenever your credit balance hits zero or below, your instances will be stopped automatically, but not destroyed.
You are still charged storage costs for stopped instances, so it is important to destroy instances when you are done using them.
Your credit card will be automatically charged periodically to pay off any outstanding negative balance.
Can you bill my card automatically so I don’t have to add credit in advance?
You can set a balance threshold to configure auto billing, which will attempt to maintain your balance above the threshold. We recommend setting a threshold around your daily or weekly spend, and then setting an balance email notification threshold around 75% of that value, so that you get notified if the auto billing fails but long before your balance depletes to zero.
How does pricing work?
There are separate prices and charges for:
Active rental (GPU) costs
Storage costs
Bandwidth costs
You are charged the base active rental cost for every second your instance is in the active/connected state. You are charged the storage cost (which depends on the size of your storage allocation) for every second your instance exists and is online, regardless of what state it is in: active, inactive, loading, etc. Stopping an instance does not avoid storage costs. You are charged bandwidth prices for every byte sent or received to or from the instance, regardless of what state it is in. The prices for base rental, storage, and bandwidth vary considerably from machine to machine, so make sure to check them. You are not charged active rental or storage costs for instances that are currently offline.
What is the billing frequency?
Balances are updated about once every few seconds.
Why should I trust vast.ai with my credit card info?
You don’t need to: Vast.ai does not see, store or process your credit card numbers, they are passed directly to Stripe (which you can verify in the javascript).
Do you support PayPal? What about cryptocurrency?
We currently support major credit cards through stripe and crypto payments through BitPay and Crypto.com.</content>
Security:
<content>Data Protection
How is my data protected from other clients?
Clients are isolated in unprivileged Docker containers and only have access to their own data. Each container is completely separate from others on the same host machine with:
Separate namespaces and cgroups
Network isolation
File system isolation
Process isolation
How is my data protected from providers?
Provider security varies significantly:
Tier 4 datacenters have extensive physical and operational security
Individual hosts may have less formal security measures
For maximum security:
Use Secure Cloud certified providers only
Encrypt sensitive data at rest
Don’t store credentials in instances
Use external key management
What is Secure Cloud?
Secure Cloud providers are vetted datacenters with:
ISO 27001 certification
Tier 3/4 datacenter standards
Verified physical security
Professional operations
Enable the “Secure Cloud” filter when searching for instances to see only these providers.
Account Security
How do I secure my account?
Best practices:
Use a strong, unique password
Regularly rotate API keys
Monitor account activity
Use separate API keys for different applications
Review billing regularly for unusual activity
What if my API key is compromised?
Immediately:
Delete the compromised key in Settings
Generate a new key
Update all applications
Check billing for unauthorized usage
Contact support if you see suspicious activity
Network Security
Are connections encrypted?
Yes, all connections use encryption:
Web interface: HTTPS with TLS
SSH: Encrypted by default
Jupyter: HTTPS with self-signed certificates
API: HTTPS required
Can I restrict network access to my instances?
Network restrictions depend on the host configuration. Some options:
Use SSH key authentication (no passwords)
Configure firewall rules in your container
Select providers with static IPs for IP whitelisting
Best Practices
Security checklist for sensitive workloads
Use Secure Cloud providers only
Encrypt data before uploading
Use strong SSH keys
Don’t store credentials in instances
Destroy instances immediately when done
Monitor account activity regularly
Use separate accounts for different projects
Implement application-level encryption
Keep software updated</content>
Technical:
<content>Docker Configuration
What Docker options can I use?
Add Docker run arguments in the template configuration:
# Port mapping
-p 8080:8080 -p 8081:8081

# Environment variables  
-e TZ=UTC -e CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES=0

# Shared memory (for PyTorch)
--shm-size=32gb
Can I use my own Docker images?
Yes! When creating a template:
Specify your Docker image URL
Ensure it’s publicly accessible or provide auth
Use standard Docker Hub, GHCR, or other registries
Include all dependencies in the image
Why can’t I run Docker inside my instance?
Docker-in-Docker is disabled for security. Alternatives:
Use separate instances for different containers
Build multi-service images
Use process managers like supervisord
Performance Optimization
How can I maximize GPU utilization?
Batch size optimization:
Increase until GPU memory is nearly full
Monitor with nvidia-smi
Data pipeline:
Pre-process data
Use multiple data loader workers
Cache datasets locally
Mixed precision training:
# PyTorch example
from torch.cuda.amp import autocast
with autocast():
    output = model(input)
Why is my training slower than expected?
Common issues:
CPU bottleneck - Check data loading
Network I/O - Download data to local storage first
Wrong GPU mode - Ensure CUDA is enabled
Thermal throttling - Some consumer GPUs throttle
PCIe bandwidth - Multi-GPU setups may be limited
Storage and Volumes
What’s the difference between instance storage and volumes?
Instance Storage:
Included with every instance
Deleted when instance is destroyed
Size set at creation (cannot change)
Faster performance
Volumes:
Persistent across instances
Can be attached/detached
Additional cost
Good for datasets and checkpoints
How do I use volumes?
Create a volume in the Volumes section
Attach when creating an instance
Mount point specified in template
Data persists after instance destruction
See Volumes Guide for details.
Environment Setup
How do I install additional packages?
In Jupyter terminal or SSH:
# System packages
apt-get update && apt-get install -y package-name

# Python packages
pip install package-name

# Conda (if available)
conda install package-name
Add to /root/onstart.sh for persistence across restarts.
How do I use specific CUDA versions?
CUDA version depends on the Docker image. To check:
nvcc --version
nvidia-smi
To use specific versions, choose appropriate templates or create custom images with your required CUDA version.
Debugging
How do I view instance logs?
Through web console: Click “Logs” on instance card
Via CLI: vastai logs INSTANCE_ID
Inside instance: Check /var/log/ directory
My instance won’t start - how do I debug?
Check instance logs for errors
Verify Docker image exists and is accessible
Check if ports are already in use
Ensure sufficient disk space requested
Try a different provider
Contact support with instance ID
How do I monitor resource usage?
# GPU monitoring
watch -n 1 nvidia-smi

# CPU and memory
htop

# Disk usage
df -h

# Network
iftop or nethogs

# All resources
gpustat -cp</content>
Networking:
<content>Port Configuration
How can I open custom ports?
Add -p arguments in the docker create/run options box in the template configuration or image config editor pop-up menu. To open ports 8081 and 8082, use something like this:
-p 8081:8081 -p 8082:8082
This will result in additional arguments to docker create/run to expose those internal ports, which will be mapped to random external ports. Any ports exposed in these docker options are in addition to ports exposed through EXPOSE commands in the docker image, and the ports 22 or 8080 which may be opened automatically for SSH or Jupyter.
After the instance has loaded, you can find the corresponding external public IP by opening the IP Port Info pop-up (button on top of the instance) and then looking for something like:
65.130.162.74:33526 -> 8081/tcp
In this case, the public IP 65.130.162.74:33526 can be used to access anything you run on port 8081 inside the instance. As a simple test case, you can run a simple minimal web browser inside the instance with the following command:
python -m http.server 8081
Which you would then access in this example by loading 65.130.162.74:33526 in your web browser.
How can I open an identity port map like 32001:32001 where external are the same?
Just use an out-of-range port above 70000:
-p 70000:70000 -p 70001:70001</content>
Instances Overview:
<content>What Are Instances?
Instances are containerized environments where you rent dedicated GPUs from Vast.ai’s marketplace. Each instance:
Provides exclusive GPU access (never shared between users)
Runs your choice of Docker image
Includes proportional CPU, RAM, and storage
Connects via SSH, Jupyter, or custom entrypoint
Bills by the second for actual usage
New to Vast.ai? Start with the Quickstart Guide.
Core Concepts
Pricing
Market-driven rates for GPU, storage, and bandwidth
Instance Types
On-demand, Reserved, and Interruptible options
Templates
Pre-configured environments or custom Docker images
Find & Rent
Find and rent GPUs by model, location, and price
Connect to Instances
SSH, Jupyter, and Entrypoint connection methods
Managing Instances
Start, stop, connect, and monitor your instances
Storage
Container storage and persistent volumes
Data Movement
Move data between instances, cloud, and local storage
Cloud Sync
Sync with Google Drive, S3, and other cloud providers
Next Steps
New to Vast.ai? Start with the Quickstart Guide → for a complete walkthrough
Ready to rent? Understand pricing → | Choose a template → | Find GPUs →
Need help connecting? Connection methods → | SSH guide → | Jupyter setup →</content>
Pricing:
<content>Vast.ai operates as a marketplace, connecting users with GPU providers worldwide. This means prices vary based on supply and demand, giving you access to competitive rates for GPU computing.
How Vast.ai Pricing Works
Unlike traditional cloud providers with fixed pricing, Vast.ai uses a marketplace model where hosts set their own prices. This creates competitive rates without static price quotes—the market determines pricing in real-time.
You can easily check current market rates:
Web: Dashboard shows real-time prices
CLI: Use vastai search offers to query prices programmatically (see CLI Commands)
API: Query programmatically via the search offers endpoint
Serverless Pricing: Vast Serverless auto-scales instances with no separate pricing tier—you pay only for the underlying instance costs (compute, storage, bandwidth) with no additional fees. See Serverless Pricing for details.
Key Pricing Principles
Market-driven rates: Prices fluctuate based on real-time supply and demand
Combined pricing: Your total cost includes a combination of GPU compute, storage, and bandwidth charges
Pay for what you use: Billed by the second for actual usage
Service level pricing: Costs vary based on dedicated or interruptible access and term length
What does Vast cost compared to other providers?
Vast typically delivers more competitive pricing than traditional cloud providers. The marketplace model creates natural price competition—hosts compete for your business rather than locking you into fixed rates.
Key advantages:
Direct competition between hosts drives rates lower
Real-time supply and demand optimizes pricing
No markup layered on top of host-set prices
Global GPU supply improves availability and cost
Check current market rates in the Dashboard or query programmatically via the CLI or API.
Cost Components
Your total rental cost includes three primary components:
GPU Compute
Charged per second while your instance is running. Rates vary significantly based on:
GPU model: High-end models (H100, A100) command premium rates
GPU quantity: Multi-GPU configurations increase costs proportionally
Host reliability: Higher reliability scores typically correlate with higher prices
Geographic location: Regional supply and demand affects pricing
Market conditions: Real-time marketplace dynamics influence rates
Storage
Billed continuously while your instance exists, regardless of running state. Storage costs vary by host and are typically higher for stopped instances than running instances.
Storage charges continue even when instances are stopped. Delete instances completely to cease storage billing.
Bandwidth
Data transfer costs vary by host and include both upload and download traffic. Charges apply per byte transferred. Review bandwidth rates during instance selection as these can significantly impact total costs for data-intensive workloads.
Instance Types & Pricing
Vast.ai offers three instance types with different pricing models:
On-demand: Fixed pricing, guaranteed resources (high priority)
Reserved: Discounted rates with pre-payment (high priority)
Interruptible: Lowest cost, may be paused (low priority)
Pricing varies by instance type, with interruptible instances often 50%+ cheaper than on-demand, and reserved instances offering up to 50% discount with commitment.
For detailed information about each instance type and when to use them, see Instance Types.
Common Pricing Questions
How do I find the cheapest GPUs?
Use the search filters on the Dashboard to sort by price. Consider:
Interruptible instances for non-critical workloads (often 50%+ cheaper)
Lower reliability scores (may offer better rates)
Different geographic regions
Can I get a discount for long-term use?
Yes! Convert any on-demand instance to reserved pricing for up to 50% off. See Reserved Instances for details.
Why do prices vary so much?
Vast.ai is a marketplace where hosts set their own prices based on:
Supply and demand in their region
Their operating costs
Machine specifications and reliability
Competition from other hosts
Billing Basics
Here are the essential billing concepts to understand:
Credits required upfront: You must add credits to your account before starting any instances
Ongoing storage charges: You continue to be billed for storage on stopped instances until they are deleted
When you run out of credits: When your credit balance reaches zero, instances are automatically stopped (your GPU is released, interrupting any active workloads). If you have a credit card on file, your card will be automatically charged to restore your balance, and your instance and data will remain available. If you have no payment method saved, your instances and data will be scheduled for deletion unless you add credits promptly.
For complete billing details, see the billing page.</content>
Docker Execution Environment:
<content>Vast.ai instances run as Linux Docker containers. Your template (or CLI command) controls most of the parameters to the underlying docker create call, while resource constraints are configured automatically by the platform.
Resource Allocation
Vast.ai automatically configures resource allocation for your instance based on your GPU allocation.
GPU
Each running instance has access to one or more GPUs. GPUs are exclusive resources — they are never shared between multiple users at the same time. Each instance has exclusive access to its assigned GPUs while running. Stopped instances have no GPU reservation.
CPU
Each instance is allocated baseline CPU power proportional to its fraction of attached GPUs out of the total machine capacity. For example, a 1-GPU instance on a 4-GPU machine gets 25% of CPU baseline.
Instances can burst above their CPU allocation while there are extra CPU cycles available, but during contention only the baseline is reserved.
RAM
System RAM is allocated similarly to CPU — each instance gets a fraction proportional to its share of attached GPUs.
Instances can temporarily use additional RAM above their allocation when free RAM is available, but doing so risks having processes killed by the OOM (Out of Memory) killer when free system RAM becomes scarce. Keep your RAM usage within your allocated baseline to avoid unexpected process termination.
Disk
Each instance has a disk storage allocation reserved at creation time. This allocation is static and cannot be changed after creation, so make sure to size your disk correctly when you create your instance.
Shared Memory
Shared memory resources (such as /dev/shm, controlled by the shm-size parameter) are assigned automatically in proportion to your GPU fraction via the underlying cgroup resource configuration.
Launch Modes
Vast.ai supports three launch modes: Entrypoint, SSH, and Jupyter. For full details, see Connection Methods.
The SSH and Jupyter launch modes inject setup scripts into your existing Docker image, which means your image’s original entrypoint is replaced. If your Docker image uses an entrypoint script, you’ll typically want to copy that entrypoint command into your onstart script.
If you run into obscure loading errors with SSH or Jupyter launch modes on a custom image, try the simpler Entrypoint launch mode and set up SSH or Jupyter yourself.
Docker Create Options
You can set three types of docker create / docker run options in the GUI and CLI:
Option Example Description
Environment variables -e JUPYTER_DIR=/ -e TEST=OK Set environment variables inside the container
Hostname -h billybob Set the container hostname
Ports -p 8081:8081 -p 8082:8082/udp Expose additional ports
Environment Variables
Use the -e flag in the docker options to set environment variables. For example, to set TZ to UTC and TASKID to “TEST”:
-e TZ=UTC -e TASKID="TEST"
Any environment variables you set are visible to your onstart script (or your entrypoint in Entrypoint launch mode).
When using SSH or Jupyter launch modes, your custom environment variables are not visible inside SSH/tmux/Jupyter sessions by default. To make them accessible, export them to /etc/environment from your onstart script.
This is handled automatically in the entrypoint of images published by Vast.ai
To export all environment variables containing an underscore:
env | grep _ >> /etc/environment;
Or to export all environment variables:
env >> /etc/environment;
User Account Variables
You can set environment variables in your Account Settings that will automatically be injected into every container you launch.
UI Control Variables
These special environment variables control elements in the Vast.ai interface:
Variable Purpose Example
OPEN_BUTTON_PORT Maps the Open button to a specific internal port -e OPEN_BUTTON_PORT=7860
JUPYTER_PORT Maps the Jupyter button to a specific internal port -e JUPYTER_PORT=8081
JUPYTER_TOKEN Sets the token used by the Jupyter button -e JUPYTER_TOKEN=mytoken
DATA_DIRECTORY Default source/destination directory for data copy operations -e DATA_DIRECTORY=/data
Predefined Variables
Vast.ai automatically sets these environment variables in every instance:
Variable Description
CONTAINER_API_KEY Per-instance API key for CLI commands from inside the container
CONTAINER_ID The unique ID of your instance
DATA_DIRECTORY Default location for data copy operations
GPU_COUNT Number of GPU devices available
PUBLIC_IPADDR The instance’s public IP address (see note below)
SSH_PUBLIC_KEY Your SSH public key from your account page
PYTORCH_VERSION The PyTorch version (if applicable)
JUPYTER_TOKEN The Jupyter access token
JUPYTER_SERVER_ROOT Root directory for Jupyter (cannot navigate above this)
JUPYTER_SERVER_URL Configured Jupyter server URL (usually https://0.0.0.0:8080/)
VAST_CONTAINERLABEL Unique name/ID of your instance
PUBLIC_IPADDR is set at instance startup and is not automatically updated if the instance’s IP address changes. If your instance has a dynamic IP, you can fetch the current address programmatically using the per-instance API key:
vastai show instance $CONTAINER_ID --api-key $CONTAINER_API_KEY
Port Variables
For each port mapping, the system creates a corresponding environment variable:
Variable Description
VAST_TCP_PORT_22 External public TCP port mapped to internal port 22 (SSH)
VAST_TCP_PORT_8080 External public TCP port mapped to internal port 8080 (Jupyter)
VAST_TCP_PORT_X External public TCP port mapped to internal port X
VAST_UDP_PORT_X External public UDP port mapped to internal port X
You can also use ports 70000 and above for identity port mappings — see Identity Ports below.
Networking
Vast.ai Docker instances have full internet access but generally do not have unique IP addresses. Instances can have public open ports, but because IP addresses are shared across machines and instances, external ports are assigned somewhat randomly.
Each instance gets a fraction of a public IP address based on a subset of ports. Each open internal port (such as 22 or 8080) is mapped to a random external port on the machine’s shared public IP address.
For detailed networking information, see Networking & Ports.
Custom Ports
There is a limit of 64 total open ports per instance.
Any EXPOSE commands in your Docker image are automatically mapped to port requests. You can also open custom ports using -p arguments in the docker options:
-p 8081:8081 -p 8082:8082/udp
These are in addition to ports exposed through EXPOSE commands and the default ports (22 for SSH, 8080 for Jupyter).
After the instance has loaded, find your mapped ports by opening the IP Port Info pop-up from the instance panel. The format is PUBLIC_IP -> INTERNAL_PORT:
65.130.162.74:33526 -> 8081/tcp
In this case, 65.130.162.74:33526 provides access to anything running on port 8081 inside the instance.
Testing Ports
You can quickly verify your port mapping by starting a minimal web server inside the instance:
python -m http.server 8081
Then access the corresponding external address in your browser — you should see a file directory listing.
Identity Ports
If you need the external and internal ports to match (for example, 32001:32001), use an out-of-range port above 70000:
-p 70000:70000 -p 70001:70001
These requests map to random external ports with matching internal ports. Find the resulting port with the corresponding environment variable: $VAST_TCP_PORT_70000.
Using the CLI from Inside an Instance
Each instance comes with a per-instance API key stored in the CONTAINER_API_KEY environment variable, allowing you to run CLI commands from within the container.
If the Vast.ai CLI isn’t already installed, install it with pip:
pip install vastai
Test it by starting the instance (a no-op since it’s already running):
vastai start instance $CONTAINER_ID
If the API key isn’t automatically configured, specify it explicitly:
vastai start instance $CONTAINER_ID --api-key $CONTAINER_API_KEY
You can also stop or destroy the instance from within:
vastai stop instance $CONTAINER_ID
vastai destroy instance $CONTAINER_ID
If $CONTAINER_ID or $CONTAINER_API_KEY is not defined, check your environment variables with the env command. If you’re in an SSH session and the predefined variables are missing, you may need to export them to /etc/environment — see the Environment Variables section above.
If the instance API key is missing for any reason, you can regenerate it:
cat ~/.ssh/authorized_keys | md5sum | awk '{print $1}' > ssh_key_hv
echo -n $VAST_CONTAINERLABEL | md5sum | awk '{print $1}' > instance_id_hv
head -c -1 -q ssh_key_hv instance_id_hv > ~/.vast_api_key
After regeneration, CLI commands should work without passing the key explicitly.</content>
Virtual Machines:
<content>Vast.ai offers full virtual machines (VMs) in addition to Docker-based instances. VMs provide a complete Linux environment, making them ideal for workloads that require init managers, nested containerization, or process tracing.
Feature Comparison
VMs offer capabilities not available in Docker-based instances:
Init manager support (e.g., systemd) — required for running Docker, Kubernetes, Snap, or other containerization tools inside your instance
Process tracing (ptrace) support
However, VMs come with some trade-offs:
Slower creation and boot times
Higher disk overhead
Smaller selection of available machines
Fewer preconfigured templates
Only SSH launch mode is currently supported
Creating a VM
Make sure you have added your SSH keys to your Account page before creating a VM. SSH keys cannot be edited on running VMs, and SSH is currently the only supported connection method.
Use one of the templates below to get started. These templates automatically filter for VM-capable machines and will launch a VM when you rent:
Template Description Provides Use Cases
Ubuntu 22.04 VM Ubuntu 22.04 server with CLI access CUDA, Docker Docker Compose applications, CUDA performance profiling
Ubuntu Desktop (VM) Ubuntu desktop with a graphical environment CUDA, Docker GUI applications, visual development workflows
Environment variables in VMs are written to /etc/environment.
Customizing VM Templates
VM images are packaged as Docker images from the docker.io/vastai/kvm repository. All VM templates must use one of these images, specified with the fully qualified name (e.g., docker.io/vastai/kvm:ubuntu_terminal).
Add vms_enabled=true to the Extra Filters field of the template to filter for machines that support VMs.
Docker Options
VM templates support the following flags in the Docker options field, which behave the same as in Docker-based instances:
Option Example Description
Environment variables -e JUPYTER_DIR=/ -e TEST=OK Written to /etc/environment inside the VM
Ports -p 8081:8081 -p 8082:8082/udp Expose additional ports
For more details on these options, see Docker Environment.
Launch Modes
Currently only SSH is supported. See the SSH guide for connection details.
Differences from Docker-Based Instances
Data copy: The cloud copy utility for VMs only supports migrating the entire VM — individual folder copies are not available.
Copy scope: Copy is only supported between two VMs, not between VMs and external cloud storage providers.
Copy command: Use vastai copy $SRC $DEST to copy between VMs. Note: vastai vm copy is not available as a CLI command.</content>
Choosing Instances:
Choosing Instances Overview:
<content>Renting an instance on Vast.ai involves three main steps that work together to get you the exact computing environment you need.
The Rental Process
1
Choose Your Template
Select or customize a Docker template that defines your software environment - PyTorch, TensorFlow, Stable Diffusion, or custom configurations.
2
Find Your GPU
Search and filter through available offers to find GPUs that match your performance needs and budget.
3
Configure & Rent
Set your disk size, review the offer details, and launch your instance.
What You’ll Need to Decide
Before renting an instance, you’ll make key decisions about:
Software Environment: Which Docker image and launch mode (SSH, Jupyter, etc.)
Hardware Requirements: GPU type, VRAM, CPU, and system RAM needed
Storage Size: How much disk space (cannot be changed after creation)
Instance Type: On-demand for reliability or interruptible for cost savings
Budget: Maximum price you’re willing to pay per hour
Quick Start Path
For the fastest path to a running instance:
Use a Recommended Template - Pre-configured and tested
Sort by Price - Find the best deals quickly
Check Reliability Score - 95%+ for important work
Start with On-demand - Upgrade to reserved later if needed
What’s in This Section
Instance Types
Understand on-demand vs interruptible vs reserved options
Choosing a Template
Understanding and selecting templates for your needs
Finding & Renting
Search, filter, configure, and rent GPU instances
Reserved Instances
Save up to 50% with prepayment options
Common Questions
How long does it take to start an instance?
Usually under 5 minutes with recommended templates. Large custom images may take longer on first launch.
Can I change my configuration later?
Template: No, you need a new instance
Disk size: No, fixed at creation
Instance type: Can convert on-demand to reserved only
What if the GPU I want isn’t available?
Set up search alerts or try different regions. Availability changes frequently as a marketplace.
Next Steps
Ready to get started? Begin with Instance Types → to understand your options.</content>
Instance Types:
<content>Vast.ai offers three instance types with different priority levels and pricing models to match your workload requirements and budget.
Overview
On-demand
High Priority Fixed pricing, guaranteed resources
Reserved
High Priority Discounted rates with pre-payment
Interruptible
Low Priority Lowest cost, may be paused
In the create interface, you’ll see a selector for “on-demand” or “interruptible”. Once an instance is rented, you cannot change its type. However, you can convert on-demand instances to reserved for discounts.
On-demand Instances
Best for: Production workloads, continuous training, time-sensitive tasks
On-demand instances provide:
Exclusive GPU control with high priority
Guaranteed resources for the rental period
Fixed pricing set by the host
Maximum duration shown on offer cards
Data persistence even when stopped
Key Considerations
Check the maximum duration before renting (shown on offer cards)
For long-running jobs (days/weeks), verify host reliability scores
When the rental contract ends, hosts may extend the rental or stop the instance
Data remains accessible when instances are stopped
Expired Instance Deletion: Expired instances may be deleted 48 hours after expiration. Retrieve your data before then. Expired instances cannot restart while expired.
Reserved Instances
Best for: Long-term projects, predictable workloads, cost optimization
Reserved instances are on-demand instances with pre-paid discounts:
Up to 50% discount based on commitment length
Same high priority as on-demand
Convert anytime from existing on-demand instances
Credits locked to the specific instance
Partial refunds available if cancelled early
To create a reserved instance, first rent on-demand, then convert using the discount badge on your instance card.
For detailed instructions on creating and managing reserved instances, see Reserved Instances.
Interruptible Instances
Best for: Batch processing, fault-tolerant workloads, development/testing
Interruptible instances use a bidding system:
Lowest cost (often 50%+ cheaper than on-demand)
Bidding priority - higher bids get priority
May be paused if outbid or if on-demand requested
Data preserved when paused but instance not functional
Resume automatically when priority returns
Working with Interruptible Instances
When using interruptible instances:
Save work frequently to disk
Use cloud storage for important outputs
Implement checkpointing in your code
Expect interruptions and plan accordingly
Priority rules:
On-demand instances always have highest priority
Among interruptible instances, highest bid wins
Paused instances resume when they regain priority
Choosing the Right Type
Use Case Recommended Type Why
Production inference On-demand Need guaranteed availability
Multi-day training Reserved Long-term discount with reliability
Hyperparameter search Interruptible Can handle interruptions, cost matters
Data preprocessing Interruptible Can resume where left off
Time-critical jobs On-demand Cannot afford interruptions
Development/testing Interruptible Short sessions, cost-sensitive
Steady workloads Reserved Predictable usage, want discounts
Quick Reference
Switching Between Types
On-demand → Reserved: ✅ Yes, anytime via discount badge
On-demand → Interruptible: ❌ No, must create new instance
Interruptible → On-demand: ❌ No, must create new instance
Reserved → On-demand: ⚠️ Lose remaining discount
Priority Levels
On-demand/Reserved: High priority, never interrupted
Interruptible (high bid): Runs when resources available
Interruptible (low bid): Paused until higher bids complete
Next Steps
Compare costs: Check current Pricing
Get discounts: Learn about Reserved Instances
Start renting: Finding & Renting</content>
Choosing a Template:
<content>What are Templates?
Templates are saved configurations that define how your instance will be set up. Every instance on Vast.ai requires a template that specifies:
Docker image - The base container environment
Launch mode - How you’ll connect (SSH, Jupyter, or Entrypoint)
Initialization - Startup scripts and environment variables
Ports and networking - Required network configurations
For comprehensive template documentation including creating custom templates, see the main Templates section.
Selecting a Template
When renting an instance, you must select a template first. You have three options:
1. Recommended Templates
Pre-configured templates for common use cases:
PyTorch - Ready for deep learning with Jupyter
TensorFlow - ML development environment
Stable Diffusion - Image generation UIs
LLM Inference - Text generation setups
Base Ubuntu - Clean development environment
2. Your Recent Templates
Templates you’ve previously used or customized are saved for quick access.
3. Custom Templates
Create your own or modify existing templates to match your exact needs.
Quick Template Selection
On the search page, look for the template selector in the upper left
Click “Change Template” to see available options
Select a template that matches your needs
The search will update to show compatible machines
Start with a recommended template and modify it rather than creating from scratch. This ensures compatibility and faster startup times.
Launch Modes
Templates support three connection methods:
SSH
Terminal access via SSH
Best for: Development, training scripts, command-line work
Includes tmux session management
Jupyter
Web-based notebook interface
Best for: Data science, experimentation, visualization
Includes terminal access
Entrypoint
Runs Docker’s native entrypoint
Best for: Automated workloads, API servers, production deployments
No automatic SSH/Jupyter setup
Important Template Settings
Docker Image
Always specify a version tag (avoid “latest”)
Vast.ai base images (vastai/pytorch) start faster due to caching
Custom images from Docker Hub supported
On-start Script
Runs after the container starts
Use for installing additional packages
Executes as bash commands
Disk Space
Set in the search interface (not the template)
Cannot be changed after instance creation
Default is 10GB - increase as needed
Common Issues
Template Compatibility
Not all templates work on all machines. If an instance fails to start:
Try a recommended template
Check Docker image availability
Verify port requirements match machine capabilities
Invalid Docker Image Path
If you get an error like “Unable to find image ‘ubuntu20.04_latest/ssh’”:
You have an invalid Docker image path
Use proper format: nvidia/cuda:12.0.1-devel-ubuntu20.04
Always include repository and tag
Test locally: docker pull <YOUR_IMAGE_PATH>
Use recommended templates to ensure valid paths
Image Loading Time
First launch can take 5-60 minutes depending on image size
Vast.ai base images load faster (pre-cached on many machines)
You’re not charged during loading
Can’t Change Template on Existing Instance
Templates are recipes for new instances. Once an instance is created:
Template changes only affect new instances
To use a different template, create a new instance
Transfer data if needed using data movement tools
Next Steps
Ready to customize? See the full Templates documentation for:
Creating custom templates
Advanced configuration
Template settings reference
Having issues?
Start with a recommended template
Check the Templates FAQ
Review troubleshooting guide</content>
Finding & Renting Instances:
<content>The search page is the main portal for finding good machines and creating instances on them.
Before renting an instance, you’ll need to select a template that defines your Docker image and connection method. If you haven’t already, review Choosing a Template to understand your options.
Page Walkthrough
Layout
You will find various search options on the top and left control bars that allow you to filter for various criteria (location, GPU type and count, various hardware specs, rental params, etc)
Offer card
The offer card shows the details of a machine available for rent, including specs, pricing, and the maximum rental duration. When you rent an instance, a rental contract is created between you and the host based on the offer’s current terms. The offer remains available for other clients until it reaches its end date or is unlisted by the host.
Most of the items on the offer card can be filtered using the search filters. Some of the important parts are the price and the maximum rental duration. Hovering over the price details the different prices for GPU rental, storage and bandwidth.
Machine Tiers
One important concept is the category of machine which is displayed on the offer card.
Unverified: These are typically new machines that have not been tested by Vast’s team and are filtered out of results by default
Verified: These machines have passed our internal tests
Secure Cloud (Datacenter): These machines are verified and confirmed to be in a certified datacenter that meets our datacenter criteria. Vast verifies that these machines are in a datacenter with a TIER 2/3 rating or ISO 27001. These offer cards have a blue label and are recommended for production
Card Details
Offer Card
All stats shown are the portion of the total machine rented.
Location and Host ID: The general region and ID of the host. Datacenter machines are labeled in blue.
GPU Model: The GPU type and number
Performance: The total TFLOPS of the GPU(s)
GPU Memory: The GPU RAM per card and GPU memory bandwidth in GB/s
Motherboard: The name of the motherboard manufacturer and type
Motherboard details: PCIE version and number of lanes along with maximum theoretical PCIE bandwidth in GB/s
CPU: The CPU type
CPU Cores: the number of cores allocated for this offer divided total
System RAM: system RAM allocated for this offer divided by the total
Network Bandwidth: Given in Mbps for upload/download
Network Ports: number of potential ports available
Storage: The type of disk
Disk speed: The speed of the local storage on the machine in MB/s
Total available disk: The maximum amount of disk space available
DLPERF score: A custom deep learning performance score
Price: The GPU rental price plus the hourly cost of the storage allocated. Hover over the price for a breakdown and for the price of bandwidth.
Max Duration: The maximum length of a rental contract on this machine
Reliability Score: A measure of the machine’s historical uptime and health. All machines start at 60%. Rental Option: RENT Button
Instance Disk Size
The storage slider is both a search filter and a parameter input which determines the storage allocation size - it’s important to size this correctly before creating any instance.
When the instance is created, the disk size is set and cannot be modified. It is important to estimate how much disk you will need and then to move the slider to the desired disk size. The default disk size for an instance is 10GB. Use the slider to allocate more or less, taking into consideration that providers charge for disk allocation even when the instance is stopped.
Disk Space
Instance Configuration
Vast.ai provides out Linux docker instances. One key step during setup is specifying what Linux docker image to load. You can also specify Docker run commands, an on-start script that executes bash commands on instance start and a launch mode to connect to the instance.
The instance configuration menu is accessible in the upper left of the create instance interface. The current template is always displayed in the upper left. Click on the “Change Template” button to bring up the template config menu that allows selecting and editing templates. For a quick overview, see Choosing a Template. For detailed template creation and Docker configuration, see the main Templates documentation
Edit
Common Questions
I can’t search for instances. I am getting the error “Error: invalid_request 0 is not a valid search op”
Reset your filters. There is probably an invalid entry in your extra filters section on the template you are currently using.
I can’t find the machine type I am looking for?
Please search to see what is available, using our Search page or vastai search offers. Please keep in mind that we are only a marketplace. We do not manage or provide the hardware. If there is nothing available there is little we can do.
When I try to rent an instance I get “Error: server_error Something went wrong on the server”
Although this error can be due to a variety of things, we recommend checking to make sure you have a version tag on your Docker Image in your template. It should look like YOUR_DOCKER_IMAGE_PATH for example “pytorch/pytorch”. Selecting “latest” in the Version Tag dropdown menu in the template editor should fix this for you if you have a null tag or no tag selected.
Why did I get “offer is no longer available”?
If you get this error when clicking the RENT button, the specific machine/GPU slot you requested is no longer available. In situations of low availability due to demand surges, many people are trying to rent the same offers at once, and only one can succeed.
Instance is taking too long to start
Startup time depends on the template and is usually under 5 minutes. If waiting over 20 minutes:
Ensure you’re using a recommended template
Try a different machine
Note: You’re not charged while instances are loading
With slow internet and large images, downloads can take an hour or more</content>
Reserved Instances:
<content>Reserved instances allow you to get significant discounts (up to 50%) by pre-paying for GPU time. You can convert any on-demand instance to a reserved instance at any time.
How Reserved Instances Work
You can convert an on-demand instance into a reserved instance with a lower hourly rate by pre-paying.
Key points:
Convert any on-demand instance to reserved pricing
Discounts up to 50% based on commitment length
Pre-paid credits are locked to that specific instance
Cannot migrate between hosts
Creating a Reserved Instance
Web UI
CLI
Step 1 — Rent the Instance
Go to Search page.
Find a GPU that meets your requirements, click the Rent button.
This creates an on-demand instance.
Step 2 — Convert to a Reserved Instance
Go to the Instances page.
On your instance card, find the green discount badge.
Save badge
Click the badge — a new window will open with the available pre-paid periods (e.g., 1 month, 3 months, 6 months).
Add Reserved Discount
Select your preferred period and confirm. The system calculates deposit and discount automatically.
Your instance is now reserved at the discounted rate. When an instance is converted to a reserved instance, you will see Saved % badge on the instance card to indicate the reserved discount is active.
Important Considerations
If you later change your mind, you can withdrawal only any fraction of the funds that remain after paying the difference between the on demand and discounted price over the current duration.
If the machine fails the implicit or explicit Service Level Agreement and is deverified the full balance can be withdrawn without penalty.
Reserved instances cannot migrate between different hosts.
Important: Every time you add credits, your discount is recalculated. Avoid adding small amounts mid-term — you could end up with a worse rate. For example: If you have a 3-month reservation and add 2 weeks of credit with only 2 weeks left, your discount could drop.
Extending a Reserved Instance
You can extend your reservation at any time:
Web UI
CLI
Same flow as above - via Save badge on instance card.
Refunds
You can cancel (destroy) a reserved / prepaid instance to get part of your deposit back. Refund = Remaining deposit minus total discount already received.
Example:
On-demand: 1/hr→1/hr→720/month
Reserved (1 month): $576/month
Cancel immediately → Refund = $576
Cancel after 15 days → Remaining = 288→Refund=288→Refund=216 (after discount penalty)
Cancel at the end → Refund = $0
You will see the refund on the Billing page -> Invoices table.
Preview Reserved Pricing Before Renting
You can check the reserved price before committing:
Go to the Search page.
Switch the On-demand filter to the Reserved filter.
Reserved Filter
Set the duration filter (e.g., 1 month), if needed.
Hover over the Rent button — you’ll see a breakdown, including a Reserved cost section.
Price Breakdown
If you like the price, click Rent and follow the steps to convert it to a reserved instance.
Common Questions
Can I switch an existing on-demand instance to reserved?
Yes, if there is an available discount. Go to the Instances page, click the discount badge on your instance card, choose a period, and confirm.
Can I extend a reserved instance?
Yes — you can extend it anytime via the same discount badge in the Instances page, as long as the instance still has an active discount period. You can use the CLI for custom amounts.
What happens if I cancel / delete a reserved instance early?
You’ll receive a partial refund of your unused pre-paid balance, minus the total discount received so far. The refund amount will be displayed in the delete instance modal and will also appear on the Billing page after you delete the instance.
What happens if I stop a reserved instance?
If you stop the instance, the GPU will be released like any other instance and may be rented by another user.
Next Steps
Learn about other rental types
Understand billing basics
View your current instances</content>
Connecting to Instances:
Overview:
<content>Choose how to access your GPU instances based on your workflow needs.
Connection Methods
SSH Access
Terminal access with port forwarding and VS Code support
Jupyter Lab
Web-based notebooks for interactive development
Note: For automated execution without interactive access, see Entrypoint below.
Additional Options
Instance Portal
Web access to any application via secure tunnels
Port Networking
Configure exposed ports and bandwidth settings
We currently support 3 launch modes: entrypoint, ssh, and jupyter.
Entrypoint
For this launch mode we simply run a docker container from your specified image as is. The docker image entrypoint is the main run process, which you can override in the GUI or CLI (—entrypoint). You can also pass arguments to your entrypoint in the GUI or CLI (—args). Entrypoint launch mode is suitable for GPU worker instances which receive tasks from your webserver. As ssh/jupyter access is not provided, your docker image is responsible for setting up any such connections as needed.
SSH
For this launch option we setup an ssh connection using proxy and or direct connections where appropriate (mapping to port 22 internal). If the machine supports open ports our system will try to setup both a direct ssh connection and a backup proxy connection. This is mostly automatic under the hood, but it does require that your docker image is compatible with typical ssh daemon setup.
With the SSH launch option your docker image entrypoint is not called as we must override it. Instead we allow you to specify an onstart script which is called as part of the new entrypoint.
So if you are using making a template from an existing docker image, you typically will want to find its entrypoint command and move that to the onstart.
More information on SSH/SCP
Jupyter
For this launch option we setup a jupyter using a proxy and or direct connections where appropriate (mapping to port 8080 internal). If the machine supports open ports our system will try to setup a direct jupyter connection with a custom HTTPS certificate. This is mostly automatic under the hood, but it does require that your docker image is compatible with typical jupyter setup.
With the Jupyter launch option your docker image entrypoint is not called as we must override it. Instead we allow you to specify an onstart script which is called as part of the new entrypoint.
So if you are using making a template from an existing docker image, you typically will want to find its entrypoint command and move that to the onstart.
More information on Jupyter and installing the certificate</content>
SSH Connection:
<content>About SSH
SSH (Secure Shell) is a protocol for safely connecting to remote servers. It encrypts your connection so you can:
Log in securely
Run commands remotely
Transfer files without exposing your data
Vast.ai instances are configured to accept keys only - Password authentication is disabled for improved security.
Quick start: Generate and add your SSH key to your Vast account
Terminal
Vast CLI
1. Generate a SSH key pair in your terminal
Bash
PowerShell
ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -C "your_email@example.com"
Creates two files (by default in ~/.ssh/):
id_ed25519 → your private key (keep safe, never share).
id_ed25519.pub → your public key (safe to share, add to servers).
-C “your_email@example.com” is optional. Whatever you put there is stored as a comment in the public key file (e.g., id_ed25519.pub). It’s just for identification (helpful if you use multiple keys), not for security.
When you run ssh-keygen -t ed25519 in Windows PowerShell, the keys are created in your Windows user profile folder: C:\Users\<YourUsername>\.ssh\
2. Copy your public key.
Bash
PowerShell
# Print the public key
cat ~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub
ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1lZ9DdI1NTE5AAAAIHWGYlMT8CxcILI/i3DsRvX74HNChkm4JSNFu0wmcv0a
3. Add it in your vast account
Adding a key to your account keys only applies to new instances.
Existing instances will not get the new key automatically. To add a key, use the instance-specific SSH interface.
For VM instances, changing keys requires recreating the VM.
Connecting to your Instance
Start a new instance and click the SSH icon to see your connection information.
Terminal Connection Options
Now you can enter the connection command string into your terminal
Bash
ssh -p 20544 root@142.214.185.187 -L 8080:localhost:8080

The authenticity of host '[142.214.185.187]:20544 ([142.214.185.187]:20544)' can't be established.
ED25519 key fingerprint is SHA256:WTUphznpN0zikMp+L5EtZpiCH6EeZ2PA/7+DSXDRjT0.
This key is not known by any other names.
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no/[fingerprint])? yes
You should now see a screen similar to this. You will, by default, be placed into a tmux session.
Connected to Instance
Direct vs Proxy Connections
Vast offers both proxy (default) and direct connection methods for SSH:
Proxy SSH: Works on all machines, slower for data transfer, uses Vast proxy server
Direct SSH: Requires machines with open ports, faster and more reliable, preferred method
Tmux
We connect you to a tmux session by default for reliability and to prevent unintentional termination of foreground processes. You can create a new bash terminal window with ctrl+b + c. Cycle through your windows with ctrl+b + n
There is an excellent guide for getting to grips with tmux at https://tmuxcheatsheet.com
If, however, you would prefer to disable TMUX, you can apply the following either in a terminal or from your template’s on-start section.
Text
touch ~/.no_auto_tmux
SSH Local Port Forwarding
An often overlooked feature of SSH is its ability to forward local ports to another machine. When you access a server remotely over SSH, you can make ports from the remote machine available as if they were listening on your own device. This is a secure alternative to opening ports on the public interface as all data is transported over the SSH connection.
Bash
ssh -p 1234 root@180.123.123.123 -L 8080:localhost:8080 -L 5000:localhost:5000
This SSH command connects to the remote instance and sets up local port forwarding (SSH tunneling):
Connection details:
Connects to IP 180.123.123.123 as user root
Uses port 1234 instead of the default SSH port 22
Port forwarding (the key part):
-L 8080:localhost:8080 - Creates a tunnel so when you access localhost:8080 on your local machine, it forwards to port 8080 on the remote server
-L 5000:localhost:5000 - Same thing for port 5000
You can repeat the -L arguments to forward as many ports as you need.
What this means: After connecting, you can open your web browser and go to https://localhost:8080 or http://localhost:5000 on your local computer, and you’ll actually be accessing services running on those ports on the remote server. It’s like creating secure “tunnels” through the SSH connection to reach applications on the remote machine that might not be directly accessible from the internet.
SSH Alternative - Jupyter Terminal
As a simple alternative to SSH, you might like to consider Jupyter Terminal instead. All instances started in Jupyter launch mode will have this enabled. It is a very straightforward web-based terminal with session persistence. It’s great for a quick CLI session.
Access the terminal from the SSH connections interface.
Troubleshooting
Permission Denied (publickey)
If you get this error when trying to SSH:
Ensure your SSH key is added to your Vast account
Verify you’re using the correct private key
Check key file permissions: chmod 600 ~/.ssh/id_ed25519
Use -vv flag for detailed debug info: ssh -vv -p PORT root@IP
SSH Key Changes
New account keys only apply to NEW instances created after adding the key
Existing instances keep their original keys (won’t get new keys automatically)
For VM instances, changing keys requires recreating the VM
To add keys to existing instances, use the instance-specific SSH interface
General Connection Issues
You can often determine the exact cause of a connection failure by using the -vv arguments with ssh to get more information.
Common reasons include:
Using the wrong private key
Incorrect permissions for your private key
Public key not added to instance or account
Connecting to the wrong port
SCP & SFTP File Transfer
Both SCP (Secure Copy Protocol) and SFTP (SSH File Transfer Protocol) are tools for securely transferring files that piggyback on the SSH protocol. They use the same authentication and encryption as SSH.
SCP (Secure Copy Protocol)
What it is: Simple, command-line tool for copying files between local and remote machines
Best for: Quick, one-time file transfers
Syntax: scp -P <port> source destination
Examples:
Bash
# Copy file TO instance
scp -P <ssh_port> my_file.txt root@<instance_ip>:/workspace/
# Copy file FROM remote server
scp -P <ssh_port> root@<instance_ip>:/workspace/my_file.txt ./
# Copy entire directory
scp -P <ssh_port> -r  myfolder/ root@<instance_ip>:/workspace/
SFTP (SSH File Transfer Protocol)
What it is: Interactive file transfer program with a full command set
Best for: Managing files, browsing directories, multiple operations
Usage: CLI or GUI tools available
Example:
Bash
# Establish connection
sftp -P <ssh_port> root@<instance_ip>

Welcome to vast.ai. If authentication fails, try again after a few seconds, and double check your ssh key.
Have fun!
Connected to 79.116.73.220.
sftp> ls
hasbooted   onstart.sh
Note that both scp and sftp take the -P argument in uppercase. This differs from the ssh command which uses lowercase.
VS Code Integration
Once you have your ssh keys set up, connecting to VS Code is quite straightforward. We will cover the basics here.
Install the Remote SSH extension
You will need to add the remote extension named ‘Remote - SSH’.
Open Remote Window
Click the open remote window button.
Open Remote Window
Enter your ssh address details in the box that appears at the top of your window
Now simply allow a moment for VS code to configure the instance and you will be able to work with the instance as if it was a local machine.
For more information, see the VS Code documentation.
Windows GUI Clients
For Windows users who prefer GUI tools, please see our Windows Connection Guide for detailed setup instructions for PuTTY, MobaXterm, and other GUI clients.</content>
Jupyter:
<content>Jupyter is an interactive notebook interface that is very popular for AI/ML development using Python. Using Jupyter, you can connect to an interface in your browser and open any notebook that you can download as a .ipynb file.
We recommend this launch mode to start. We also recommend this launch mode over trying to run Google Colab with Vast. While Google Colab has a way to connect to a “local runtime”, running Jupyter directly is more robust and less error prone if connections drop or the browser window is closed.
By default Jupyter instances use a proxy server. This is a simple setup that works on machines with or without open ports. The only downside is it can be slower to upload/download large files.
Jupyter direct HTTPS launch mode
When selecting Jupyter there is a check box for “Jupyter direct HTTPS”. This preferred option will establish a direct connection to the instance which is faster for uploading and downloading files from your local machine. Selecting this option will automatically filter out machines that do not have open ports, as they cannot establish a direct connection.
Jupyter uses a browser interface, so to get the direct HTTPS connection to work, you will need to install a certificate onto your operating system.
WARNING
If you don’t install the browser certificate, Windows and Linux will show a “Your connection is not private” Privacy error. It is annoying but you can click through by clicking “Advanced” and then proceed.
If you don’t install the certificate on macOS, the OS might not let you open the Jupyter webpage.
Installing the TLS certificate
Start by downloading the certificate here. Then follow the directions for your operating system.
In most operating systems, double clicking on the certificate will start an installation wizard. You can also access the correct settings by clicking on the appropriate security settings in your browser.
Chrome on Windows
Open your Chrome security settings by clicking on the three dot menu in the upper right. Then click Settings. Then click Privacy and security on the left hand navigation. From that menu, select Security.
Click on “Manage device certificates”
Click Next and then click Import and find the downloaded jvastai_root.cer file.
Click “Place all certificates in the following store” and then use the browse button. Click on the Trusted Root Certification Authorities folder.
Cert Chrome Windows 1
Click finish and agree to finalize the import. No reboot is necessary and all new instances created will then not have the warning pop-up.
Note that existing instances will still have the warning.
Chrome on Linux
Open your Chrome security settings by clicking on the three dot menu in the upper right. Then click Settings. Then click Privacy and security on the left hand navigation. From that menu, select Security (safe browsing).
Scroll down and select “Manage Certificates” on that page.
Select the ‘Authorities’ tab under ‘Manage certificates’.
Press the import button and import the downloaded jvastai_root.cer file. You may need to select show all file types.
Windows - General
After downloading the certificate, double click on it to open the installation wizard.
Click “Open”.
Cert Windows 1
Click on the “Install Certificate” button. Select either the current user or local machine and hit next.
Cert Windows 2
Click “Place all certificates in the following store”.
Click Browse and select the folder “Trusted Root Certification Authorities”. Click OK. Then click Next. Click “Finish” to install the certificate.
Cert Windows 3
Reboot the machine so the change can take effect.
macOS
Double click the certificate after downloading it. It will then be added to your Keychain under the Login default keychain. Make sure that the Keychain Access application is opened and that there is an entry for Vast.ai Jupyter in the list of certificates. If it does not appear, then use the import button to manually import the certificate so that it appears in your list of certificates.
Cert Macos 1
Double click the entry and then click on the “Trust” box.
Change the “When using this certificate” box to “Always Trust”.
Cert Macos 2
Close the window. The change should take effect immediately for all instances you have running and create in the future.</content>
Windows SSH Guide:
<content>Windows Powershell
Modern versions of Windows support running CLI ssh commands in PowerShell. We recommemnd you use the CLI wherever possible.
This guide will focus only on Windows GUI tools. If you would like to proceed with the CLI, please navigate to the full SSH guide for setup information.
Jupyter Terminal - SSH Alternative
As a simple alternative to SSH, you might like to consider Jupyter Terminal instead. All instances started in Jupyter launch mode will have this enabled. It is a very straightforward web-based terminal with session persistence. It’s great for a quick CLI session.
Access the terminal from the SSH connections interface
Jupyter Terminal
GUI Setup Guide (Windows)
Several GUI tools are available to help with SSH connectivity. While it is often most straightforward to use the terminal we will cover some of the popular options here.
For each application we will assume the following:
IP address: 142.114.29.158
Port: 46230
Username: root
To find your own connection details you can click the SSH button on your instance card.
SSH Button

Example SSH Details
PuTTY
PuTTY consists of two important components - PuTTY for making connections and PuTTYGen for creating SSH keys.
First, we will generate a public and private key pair. PuTTy uses its own .ppk private key type.
Open PuTTYGen and click the ‘Generate’ button. You will be asked to move your mouse around until the green bar is full.
PuTTYgen Key Generation
Once the key generation has completed, save both your public and private key somewhere safe such as in your Documents folder. Optionally you can enter a passphrase for your private key for added security.
Next, copy the full public key to the clipboard and add it to your account at https://cloud.vast.ai/manage-keys/
Any keys stored at the account level will automatically be added to new instances as they are created. If you have an existing instance you can add keys to it from the instance card.
Save Keys
Now that we have a suitable key to use, close PuTTYGen and open the main PuTTY application.
In the ‘Session’ tab, enter the IP address and the port
PuTTY session tab
Next, move to the ‘Connection -> Data` tab and set the Auto-login username to ‘root’
Connection data tab
Now navigate to ‘Connection -> SSH -> Auth -> Credentials’ and browse for the private key (.ppk) that you saved earlier.
SSH credentials tab
Finally navigate back to the ‘Sessions’ tab to save the connection details. Here I have saved the session with the instance ID so that I can access it again later.
Save connection
Finally, Click the ‘Open’ button to be connected to your instance.
PuTTY has many additional features to explore. Find the full documentation here.
MobaXterm
First, we need to create a public and private key pair. MobaXterm uses puTTY style .ppk keys.
Open the application and navigate to Tools -> MobaKeyGen (SSH Key Generator)
Glick the ‘Generate’ button. You will be asked to move your mouse around until the green bar is full.
Generate Key
Once the key generation has completed, save both your public and private key somewhere safe such as in your Documents folder. Optionally you can enter a passphrase for your private key for added security.
Next, copy the full public key to the clipboard and add it to your account at https://cloud.vast.ai/manage-keys/
Any keys stored at the account level will automatically be added to new instances as they are created. If you have an existing instance you can add keys to it from the instance card.
Save Keys

Now you can close the key generation interface. We will create a new session.
Navigate to Sessions -> New Session -> SSH
Create a Session
Important details to complete:
Remote Host
Specify Username (root)
Port
Use private key
Click ‘OK’ and you will be connected to the instance.
Successful Connection
You can find the documentation for MobaXterm here.
Other GUI Clients
Many GUI clients are available for Windows and other operating systems, and although it is not possible to cover all of these here, the key things to remember when setting up are:
Create a public and private key pair
Add the public key to your vast account and any running instances
Keep the private key safe
Ensure you are connecting to the correct IP address and port as user root</content>
Instance Portal:
<content>What is the Instance Portal?
The Instance Portal is the first application you will see after clicking the ‘Open’ button to access an instance that has been loaded with a Vast.ai Docker image. Many of our recommended templates include the Instance Portal.
Instance card interface shows the open button
Loading Process
Upon opening the Instance Portal you will see a loading indicator for a short time.
Loading Indicator
During this loading phase, a secure Cloudflare tunnel will be created for each of your instance’s open ports and the browser will test whether these tunnel links are accessible.
The secure tunnel link will be formatted like this:
https://four-randomly-selected-words.trycloudflare.com
When the secure tunnel for port 1111 becomes accessible, the instance Portal will redirect to this link before revealing the full interface.
If it is taking too long for the tunnels to be ready, you will see the Instance Portal interface revealed at http://ip_address:port_1111
If you would like the default application URLs to be https:// rather than http:// you can add the following environment variable to your account level environment variables:
Enable HTTPS Variable
If you set this variable, it is important to add the Vast.ai Jupyter certificate to your local system to avoid browser warnings. See this page for more information about installing the certificate.
Landing Page
The instance Portal has a simple interface to help you access other web applications that may be running in the instance. See the configuration section of this document for further details on application startup.
Landing Page
The large blue ‘Launch Application’ buttons will open your running applications in a new browser tab.
If a secure tunnel is available, the button will open the ‘trycloudflare.com’ link. If a tunnel is not yet available then the button will open the direct IP address link.
In both cases, a secure token is appended to the link to prevent unauthorised access to your applications.
You can also click the ‘Advanced Connection Options’ link to see all available connection methods.
Tunnels Page
Use this page to manage existing secure tunnels and add new tunnels to get access to ports that have not directly been opened in the instance
Tunnels Page
Use this interface to create links to applications you have started after configuring your instance. For example:
If you started an instance but later decide that you want to install some new software that listens on port 7860, it will not be available directly if you did not configure the port when creating or editing the template.
Simply enter http://localhost:7860 in the top input box and click the blue ‘Create New Tunnel’ button. A tunnel will be created for this port. It may take a moment to be available after creation.
You can use the ‘Manage’ buttons to stop existing tunnels or to refresh them if you want a new URL.
If you would like to link your own domain name to the instance then please see ‘Named Tunnels’ in the configuration section of this document.
Instance Logs Page
The logs page will show a live stream of entries added to any .log files in the /var/log/portal/ directory.
Use the ‘Copy Logs’ button to copy the currently displayed logging output to your clipboard. You can also use the ‘Download Logs’ button to download a zip file containing all files and directories in the /var/log/ directory of your instance.
Instance Portal logs interface
Tools & Help Page
This page links to useful pages in the Vast.ai documentation to help you get the most from your instance.
Instance Portal tools and help page
Configuration
Initial configuration of the Instance Portal is via the PORTAL_CONFIG enviroment variable. The default value looks like this:
Bash
localhost:1111:11111:/:Instance Portal|localhost:8080:18080:/:Jupyter|localhost:8080:8080:/terminals/1:Jupyter Terminal|localhost:8384:18384:/:Syncthing|localhost:6006:16006:/:Tensorboard
Each application is separated by a pipe (|) character, and each application option is separated by a colon (:)
For each application, we provide the following configuration options
Interface to bind the application (currently always localhost)
External port to proxy the application. This must have been added to the template. Eg. -p 1111:1111)
Internal port where the running application will be bound
URL path for links to open (often /)
Application Name
Where the external port and internal port are not equal, a reverse proxy (Caddy) will make your application available on the external port.
Where the external port and internal port are equal the application will not be proxied to the external port but secure tunnel application links will be created.
In Place Configuration
On first boot the configuration variable will be processed and is used to create the configuration file /etc/portal.yaml
You can edit this file in a running instance to add or remove applications from the interface.
Any applications you have added after the instance has started will not initially be reachable so you will need to reboot the instance.
Disable Default Applictions
The startup scripts we use for the default applications we provide will read this configuration and will not start if they are not specified in the configuration file.
Named Tunnels
While the default behavior of the Instance Portal is to create ‘quick’ tunnels with a randomly assigned subdomain of ‘trycloudflare.com’, it is also possible to assign a pre-configured subdomain of your own domain name.
To do this you will need a free Cloudflare Zero Trust account and a domain name linked to that account.
Here’s an example of how your tunnel configuration might look in the Cloudflare dashboard:
Once you have created your named tunnel, you can link it to your instance by providing the token associated with your tunnel as the value of environment variable CF_TUNNEL_TOKEN. You can save this in the ‘Environment Variables’ section in your account settings or directly in the template if you are saving it privately.
If the instance is already running you can provide then token in the /etc/environment file and reboot the instance.
Named tunnels are generally more reliable than quick tunnels and will provide consistent URLs you can use to access applications running in an instance.
When named tunnels are configured, the ‘Launch Application’ button will direct to the named tunnel rather than the quick tunnel.
Important: Using the same tunnel token for multiple running instances is not possible and will cause broken links. If you need several instances then you will need a separate tunnel token for each of them.</content>
Networking & Ports:
<content>How Networking Works
Vast.ai docker instances have full internet access, but generally do not have unique IP addresses. Instances can have public open ports, but as IP addresses are shared across machines/instances the public external ports are partitioned somewhat randomly.
In essence each docker instance gets a fraction of a public IP address based on a subset of ports. Each open internal port (such as 22 or 8080 etc) is mapped to a random external port on the machine’s (usually shared) public IP address.
Selecting the ssh launch mode will open and use port 22 internal by default, whereas jupyter will open and use port 8080 (in addition to 22 for ssh).
Opening Custom Ports
There are several ways to open additional application ports:
There is currently a limit of 64 total open ports per container/instance.
Using Docker Options
You can open custom ports for any docker image using -p arguments in the docker create/run options box in the image config editor pop-up menu.
To open ports 8081 (tcp) and 8082 udp, use something like this:
Text
-p 8081:8081 -p 8082:8082/udp
This will result in additional arguments to docker create/run to expose those internal ports, which will be mapped to random external ports.
Any ports exposed in these docker options are in addition to:
Ports exposed through EXPOSE commands in the docker image
Ports 22 or 8080 which may be opened automatically for SSH or Jupyter
Using EXPOSE in Dockerfile
Any EXPOSE commands in your docker image will be automatically mapped to port requests.
Finding Your Mapped Ports
After the instance has loaded, you can find the corresponding external public IP by opening the IP Port Info pop-up (button on top of the instance) and then looking for the external port which maps to your internal port.
It will have a format of PUBLIC_IP -> INTERNAL_PORT. For example:
Text
65.130.162.74:33526 -> 8081/tcp
In this case, the public IP 65.130.162.74:33526 can be used to access anything you run on port 8081 inside the instance.
Testing Your Ports
We strongly recommend you test your port mapping. You can quickly test your port mapping with a simple command to start a minimal web server inside the instance:
Text
python -m http.server 8081
Which you would then access in this example by loading 65.130.162.74:33526 in your web browser. This should open a file directory.
Identity Ports
In some cases you may need an identity port map like 32001:32001 where external and internal ports are the same.
For this just use an out-of-range port above 70000:
Text
-p 70000:70000 -p 70001:70001
These out of range requests will map to random external ports and matching internal ports. You can then find the resulting mapped port with the appropriate env variables like: $VAST_TCP_PORT_70000
Port Environment Variables
Our system predefines environment variables for port mappings that you can use:
Default Ports
VAST_TCP_PORT_22: The external public TCP port that maps to internal port 22 (ssh)
VAST_TCP_PORT_8080: The external public TCP port that maps to internal port 8080 (jupyter)
Custom Ports
For each internal TCP port request:
VAST_TCP_PORT_X: The external public TCP port that maps to internal port X
For each internal UDP port request:
VAST_UDP_PORT_X: The external public UDP port that maps to internal port X
Special Environment Variables for UI
You can use special environment variables to control the Vast.ai interface:
OPEN_BUTTON_PORT
Set this to map the open button on the instance panel to a specific (external) port corresponding to the specified internal port.
Text
-e OPEN_BUTTON_PORT=7860
This will map the open button to whatever external port maps to internal port 7860.
JUPYTER_PORT
Use this to control the jupyter button. Set this to your internal jupyter port and the UI will map the jupyter button to open jupyter on the corresponding IP in a new tab.
Text
-e JUPYTER_PORT=8081
This will map the jupyter button to whatever external port maps to internal port 8081.
JUPYTER_TOKEN
Use this to control the jupyter button. Set this to your jupyter token and the UI will map the jupyter button to open jupyter using the corresponding JUPYTER_TOKEN in a new tab.
Text
-e JUPYTER_TOKEN=TOKEN
This will use TOKEN as a value of your jupyter Token.
Docker Create Options
You can currently set 3 types of docker create/run options in the GUI and CLI:
Environment variables: -e JUPYTER_DIR=/ -e TEST=OK
Hostname: -h billybob
Ports: -p 8081:8081 -p 8082:8082/udp -p 70000:70000
Best Practices
Test your ports: Always verify port mappings work after instance creation
Use identity ports sparingly: Only when absolutely necessary (ports above 70000)
Document your port usage: Keep track of which services use which ports
Check the limit: Remember the 64 port limit per instance
Use environment variables: Leverage predefined port variables in your scripts</content>
Managing Instances:
<content>Overview
The Instances page (cloud.vast.ai/instances) is your central hub for managing rented instances. From here you can:
View instance status and information
Start, stop, and destroy instances
Access connection details
Monitor resource usage
Transfer data between instances
Instance Card Interface
Instances Page
Each instance card displays comprehensive information about your rental:
Main Status Button
Open button
The main button (left side of card) shows instance status and provides quick access:
Status Indicators:
Open: Instance loaded, click to access via browser
Connect: Instance loaded, click for SSH info
Inactive: Stopped but data preserved (can restart if GPU available)
Offline: Machine disconnected from Vast servers
Scheduling: Attempting to restart (waiting for GPU availability)
Creating: Vast initiating instance creation
Loading: Downloading Docker image
Connecting: Docker running but connection not verified
Instance Information
ID numbers
ID Information:
Instance ID - Unique identifier for your instance
Host/Datacenter ID - Provider identification
Machine ID - Physical machine identifier
Hardware Details:
GPU model and count
CPU and RAM allocation
Storage capacity
Network configuration
Contract Info:
Instance age (time since creation)
Rental end date
Remaining duration
Instance Operations
Starting, Stopping, and Destroying
Stop Button (square icon): Pauses instance, preserves data, continues storage charges
Destroy Button (trash icon): Permanently deletes instance and all data
Restart Button (play icon): Appears when stopped, attempts to reclaim GPU
Important: Stopped instances continue incurring storage charges. Destroy instances when no longer needed to avoid ongoing costs.
Restart Behavior
Play button
When restarting a stopped instance:
Instance enters SCHEDULING status
Waits for GPU availability
If stuck >30 seconds, GPU likely rented by another user
Cancel scheduling by clicking stop again
Consider creating new instance if GPU unavailable
Additional Controls
Label Instance - Add custom name for identification
Reboot Instance - Restart without data loss
View Logs - Access Docker container logs
Data Management
Data movement
Copy Data - Transfer between your instances (see Data Movement)
Cloud Sync - Sync with cloud providers (see Cloud Sync)
Use Cloud Sync only on trusted datacenters (indicated by Secure icon).
Connection Quick Reference
For detailed connection instructions, see Connect to Instances:
SSH button - Shows SSH command
Open button - Launches web UI
IP/Ports button - Network information
Troubleshooting Instance States
Instance Stuck on “Loading”
Normal for 30 seconds with cached images
Can take hours with slow internet/large images
Not charged during loading
Try machines with faster internet
Instance Stuck on “Scheduling”
When stopped instances try to restart:
GPU may be reassigned to other users
High-priority jobs block restart
May wait indefinitely for GPU availability
Consider copying data to new instance
Instance Stuck on “Connecting”
Port configuration may be broken
Report the machine
Try different machine
Machine Shows “Offline”
Lost connection to Vast servers
Often internet/power issues
Host notified automatically
May be maintenance or unforeseen problems
Important Considerations
Data Persistence
Stopped instances: Data preserved, storage charges continue
Destroyed instances: All data permanently deleted
Before destroying: Copy important data or sync to cloud
Contract Expiration
Expired instances may be deleted 48 hours after expiration. Expired instances cannot restart. Retrieve your data promptly.
Security
Hosts can technically access files on their machines
For sensitive data, use verified datacenters
Implement encryption for critical data
IP Addresses
Some instances have dynamic IPs that may change. Check IP type via the IP button on instance card. For static IPs, filter by “Static IP Address” when searching.
Common Questions
Can I run Docker inside my instance?
No, instances are already Docker containers. Docker-in-Docker is not supported.
Do I pay for “Loading” instances?
No, you’re not charged while instances show “Loading” status.
Can I view past instances?
No, destroyed instances cannot be viewed. Recent template history is preserved for configuration reference.
Why is my machine location showing only ”, US”?
This means geolocation couldn’t determine the state. It’s not an indication of reliability.
Can I run VMs or bare metal?
Currently only Docker containers are supported. VM and bare-metal options planned for future.
Next Steps
Data Movement
Transfer files to and from your instances
Reserved Instances
Save up to 50% with long-term commitments
Instance Portal
Access web services running in your instances</content>
Storage:
Storage Types:
<content>Storage Overview
Vast.ai provides two main types of storage for your instances:
Container Storage - Temporary storage within Docker container that’s deleted with instance
Volumes - Persistent local storage that survives instance deletion (see Volumes guide)
Container Storage
Container storage is the default storage allocated to every instance when it’s created.
Key Characteristics
Size is fixed at creation: You must specify the disk size when creating the instance
Cannot be resized: Once created, the allocation cannot be changed
Persists while instance exists: Data remains even when instance is stopped
Deleted with instance: All data is permanently lost when instance is destroyed
Charged continuously: Storage costs apply even when instance is stopped
Default Allocation
Minimum: 10GB (default)
Maximum: Varies by host machine capacity
Set via disk size slider during instance creation
Storage charges continue even when instances are stopped. To stop storage billing, you must destroy the instance completely.
Best Practices
Estimate generously: Better to have extra space than run out mid-task
Monitor usage: Check disk space regularly with df -h
Clean up regularly: Remove unnecessary files to free space
Back up important data: Container storage is lost when instance is destroyed
Volumes
Volumes provide persistent storage that survives instance destruction and can be reattached to new instances.
Key Features
Local only: Tied to the physical machine where created
Persistent: Survives instance destruction
Reattachable: Can be mounted to new instances on same machine
Fixed size: Cannot be resized after creation
Separate billing: Charged independently from instances
Volume Limitations
Cannot migrate between different physical machines
Can only attach to instances on the same host
Must destroy attached instance before deleting volume
Size must be specified at creation time
For detailed volume management, see Volumes.
Storage Costs
Storage pricing varies by host and includes:
Container storage: Charged per GB while instance exists
Volume storage: Charged per GB while volume exists
Different rates: Stopped instances may have higher storage rates than running instances
Data Persistence Strategy
Temporary Work
Use container storage for:
Temporary files
Build artifacts
Cache data
Working datasets
Important Data
Use volumes or cloud sync for:
Trained models
Datasets
Code repositories
Configuration files
Backup Options
Volumes: For same-machine persistence
Cloud Sync: For off-machine backup (Google Drive, S3, etc.)
Instance-to-instance copy: Transfer between instances
SCP/SFTP: Download to local machine
Common Questions
Can I increase storage after instance creation?
No, container storage size is fixed at creation. You can:
Create a new instance with more storage and transfer your data
Attach a volume for additional space
Use cloud storage for overflow
What happens to my data when the instance stops?
Container storage: Data persists, charges continue
Volumes: Data persists, charges continue
No data is lost when stopping instances
How do I avoid storage charges?
Destroy instances you’re not using
Delete unneeded volumes
Transfer important data to local/cloud storage first
Next Steps
Volumes Guide
Create and manage persistent storage volumes
Data Movement
Transfer files between instances and local machines
Cloud Sync
Connect to Google Drive, S3, and other cloud storage</content>
Volumes:
<content>The Storage page allows you to easily access and manage your volumes - storage that can be attached to your instances for data storage.
We currently provide local volumes only, meaning:
A volume is physically tied to the machine it was created on.
It can only be attached to instances running on the same physical machine.
It cannot be moved or attached to instances on other machines.
Volume size cannot be changed after creation, so be sure to choose the size carefully based on your expected storage needs.
Creating a Volume in GUI
This guide will walk you through the process of creating a volume using a template in the GUI. You can create the volume during instance creation by using a template with volume settings enabled, or you can create a volume by using dropdown menu on the Search page.
How to create a volume via Add volume dropdown menu on the Search page?
Select a template then click on Add volume dropdown. You will see an option labeled Local volume with a + (plus) button next to it.
Click + button. This will allow you to adjust the volume size using the slider. Once enabled, offes will display the available volume size.
Create local volume
Click Rent button to launch your instance along with the volume. Once the instance is running, your volume will be automatically mounted and available inside the container at the /data directory.
Volume on instance
You can find your volume information on Storage page.
Volume info
How to create a volume using a template?
Choose a Template. You can either choose an existing template from the Recommended list or create your own custom template.
Open Template Editor (Click on pencil icon on a template card). Scroll down until you see the Disk Space (Container + Volume) section.
In this section, check the box Add recommended volume settings. Once selected, a new configuration area will appear where you can enter the volume size and specify the installation path. A default path is provided, but you can modify it if needed.
Volume settings
After filling in the volume details, click Save&Use or Create&Use Template to apply your changes and navigate to the Search page. Offers that support volumes will now display a volume badge showing the available volume size. You can adjust the volume size using the slider in the Search page after your template is configured.
Select a GPU and click Rent button.
How to view volume pricing?
To view pricing details, simply hover over the Rent button for any offer.
Deleting volume
To delete a volume, the instance it is attached to must be deleted first. Deleting a volume that is currently mounted to a running or stopped instance is not allowed.
Delete a Volume:
Make sure the volume is not attached to any instance. If it is, delete the instance first from the Instances page.
Once the volume is detached, go to the Storage page.
Find the volume you want to delete, click on the three-dot menu (⋮) next to it, and select “Delete volume”.
Delete volume
Confirm the deletion. This action is permanent and cannot be undone.
Important: Deleting a volume will permanently remove all data stored in it. Make sure to back up any important data before proceeding.
How to create an instance with existing volume?
If you already have a volume and want to launch a new instance using it, follow these steps:
Go to the Storage page and select the volume you want to use.
In the Volume Info section, you will see a button labeled Rent instance using this volume.
Click this button. You will be redirected to the Search Page, where available offers are automatically filtered to match the same machine where the volume is located.
Select your preferred offer and proceed to launch the instance. The selected volume will be automatically attached to the instance upon creation.
Creating a Volume in CLI
To create a volume, you can use the vast CLI. See our CLI documentation for set-up and usage of the CLI. You can search for volume offers using the command:
Text
vastai search volumes
There is a modified list of search params available, for more information, you can add the — help option to the search.
This will bring up a list of available volume offers. You will be able to see the maximum capacity for the volume (in Gigabytes). Just like creating an instance, you can copy the offer ID and create a volume with the command:
Text
  vastai create volume <offer_id> -s <volume_size> -n <name>
This will send a command to the host machine to allocate the given space to your volume. You can optionally specify a name with -n, it can be alphanumeric with underscores, with a max length of 64. If all goes well, you should be able to see your volume as created when you run the command
Text
vastai show volumes
How can I  create an instance with a volume?
Now that your volume is created, you can use it by creating an instance on the machine with the volume, and passing the volume in the env argument. The format is -v <volume_name>:<mount_point>, for example:
Text
vastai create instance 874 --image pytorch/pytorch --env '-v V.881:/mnt' --disk 30 --ssh --direct
That command mounts your volume at the directory /mnt. The directory does not need to exist in order to be mounted.
Can I use my volume on a different machine?
No. Volumes are local — they are physically tied to the machine they were created on and cannot be moved or attached to instances on other machines.
However, you can copy data between volumes on different machines using the vastai copy command with the V.volume_id:path format:
Text
vastai copy V.<src_volume_id>:/data/ V.<dst_volume_id>:/data/
You can also copy between a volume and a running instance:
Text
vastai copy V.<volume_id>:/data/ C.<instance_id>:/workspace/
vastai copy C.<instance_id>:/workspace/ V.<volume_id>:/data/
Note: Volume copy does not support cloud storage endpoints (S3, Google Drive, etc.) or local paths — only volume-to-volume and volume-to-instance transfers are supported.
How can I delete my volume?
When you’re done using it, you can delete your volume using the command
Text
vastai delete volume <volume_id>
This will only work if all instances using the volume have been destroyed.
How can I see what instances are using my volume?
The command
Text
vastai show volumes
will display a list of volumes you own, as well as what instances exist that are using that volume.
A machine with my volume went offline! Am I still being charged?
Just like with normal instances, you are never charged when a machine is offline. This is usually a temporary issue, and when the machine comes back online, volume charges will resume as normal. If you wish to delete the volume in the meantime, you can do so, and you will not be charged when the machine comes back online. If the machine is offline for an extended period of time, please reach out to vast support.
Can I use my volume with a VM instance?
At this time, volumes are only supported for docker instances, and cannot be used with VM instances.</content>
Data Movement:
<content>Vast.ai currently supports several built-in mechanisms to copy data to/from instance storage (in addition to all of the standard linux/unix options available inside the instance):
For docker based instances:
Instance<->Instance and Instance<->Local copy using the vastai copy CLI command
Instance<->Instance copy in the GUI instance control panel or vastai copy CLI command
Cloud Sync using the GUI instance control panel or vastai cloud copy CLI command
For VM instances:
Instance<->Instance migration through the vastai copy CLI command or the GUI instance control panel
These are in addition to standard ssh based copy protocols such as scp or sftp which you can run over ssh, built in jupyter http copy, and any other linux tools you can run inside the instance yourself (rclone, rsync, bittorent, insync etc).
The 3 built-in methods discussed here are unique in that they offer ways to copy data to/from a stopped instance, with some constraints. Copying data between instances accrues internet bandwidth usage charges (with prices varying across providers), unless the copy is between two instances on the same machine or local network, in which case there is no bandwidth charge.
Cloud Sync
The Cloud Sync feature allows you to copy data to/from instance local storage and several cloud storage providers (S3, gdrive, backblaze, etc) - even when the instance is stopped.
Using the GUI
Vast currently supports Dropbox, Amazon S3 and Backblaze cloud storage providers.
First you will need to connect to the cloud provider on the account page and then use the cloud copy button on the instance to start the copy operation.
Cloud Copy
See Cloud Sync for more details.
Using the CLI
You can also access this feature using the vastai cloud copy CLI command.
Instance <-> Instance copy
Instance to instance copy allows moving data directly between the local storage of two instances. If the two instances are on the same machine or the same local network (same provider and location) then the copy can run at faster local network storage speeds and there is no internet transit cost.
Using the GUI
You can use the copy buttons to copy data between two instances. Instances can be stopped/inactive. See complete Constraints below.
Click the copy button on the source instance and then on the destination instance to bring up the copy dialogue. For docker-based instances you will see the following folder dialogue.
Itoicopy
Pick the folders where you want to copy to/from. Leave a ’/’ at the end of the source directory to copy all the files inside into the target directory, vs nesting a copy of the source dir into the target dir.
WARNING\
You should not copy to /root or / as a destination directory, as this can mess up the permissions on your instance ssh folder, breaking future copy operations (as they use ssh authentication).
Copy Modal
After clicking the copy button, give it 5-10 seconds to start. The status messages will display as the copy operation begins.
For VM based instances you will see a confirmation dialog instead; the copy will copy your entire source instance to the destination machine. The destination instance’s disk will be replaced by the contents of the source instance.
Using the CLI
You can also access this feature using the vastai copy CLI command.
CLI Copy Command
You can use the CLI copy command to copy from/to directories on a remote instance and your local machine, or to copy data between two remote instances. The copy command uses rsync and is generally fast and efficient, subject to single link upload/download constraints.
The copy command supports multiple location formats:
[instance_id:]path - Legacy format (still supported)
C.instance_id:path - Container copy format
cloud_service:path - Cloud service format
cloud_service.cloud_service_id:path - Cloud service with ID
local:path - Explicit local path
Examples:
Text
vastai copy 6003036:/workspace/ 6003038:/workspace/
vastai copy C.11824:/data/test local:data/test
vastai copy local:data/test C.11824:/data/test
vastai copy drive:/folder/file.txt C.6003036:/workspace/
vastai copy s3.101:/data/ C.6003036:/workspace/
The first example copy syncs all files from the absolute directory ‘/workspace’ on instance 6003036 to the directory ‘/workspace’ on instance 6003038. The second example copy syncs files from container 11824 to the local machine using structured syntax. The third example copy syncs files from local to container 11824 using structured syntax. The fourth example copy syncs files from Google Drive to an instance. The fifth example copy syncs files from S3 bucket with id 101 to an instance.
CLI Copy Command (VMs)
For VM instances, use the standard vastai copy command with two instance IDs. This performs a full-disk migration: the destination VM’s disk is completely replaced with the contents of the source machine. No subpaths or individual folder selection is supported.
vastai vm copy is not available as a CLI command. Use vastai copy instead.
Example:
Text
vastai copy 1241241 1241245
This will transfer the entire disk contents of instance 1241241 to instance 1241245.
Constraints
The destination instance must be stopped during the transfer.
Only full-disk copies are supported — subpaths and individual folder copies are not available for VMs.
Copy is only supported between two VM instances, not to/from cloud storage.
Performance
If your data is already stored in the cloud (S3, gdrive, etc) then you should naturally use the appropriate linux CLI or commands to download and upload data directly, or you could use the Cloud Sync feature. This generally will be one the fastest methods for moving large quantities of data, as it can fully saturate a large number of download links. If you are using multiple instances with significant data movement requirements you will want to use high bandwidth cloud storage to avoid any single machine bottlenecks.
If you launched a Jupyter notebook instance, you can use its upload feature, but this has a file size limit and can be slow.
You can also use standard Linux tools like scp, ftp, rclone, or rsync to move data. For moving code and smaller files scp is fast enough and convenient. However, be warned that the default ssh connection uses a proxy and can be slow for large transfers (direct ssh recommended).
Instance to instance copy is generally as fast as other methods, and can be much faster (and cheaper) for moving data between instances on the same datacenter.
SCP
If you launched an ssh instance, you can copy files using scp. The proxy ssh connection can be slow (in terms of latency and bandwidth). Thus we recommend only using scp over the proxy ssh connection for smaller transfers (less than 1 GB). For larger inbound transfers, using the direct ssh connection is recommended. Downloading from a cloud data store using wget or curl can have much higher performance.
The relevant scp command syntax is:
Text
scp -P PORT LOCAL_FILE root@IPADDR:/REMOTEDIR
The PORT and IPADDR fields must match those from the ssh command (note the use of -P for port instead of -p !). The “Connect” button on the instance will give you these fields in the form:
Text
ssh -p PORT root@IPADDR -L 8080:localhost:8080
For example, if Connect gives you this:
Text
ssh -p 7417 root@52.204.230.7 -L 8080:localhost:8080
You could use scp to upload a local file called “myfile.tar.gz” to a remote folder called “mydir” like so:
Text
scp -P 7417 myfile.tar.gz root@52.204.230.7:/mydir
Common Questions
How do you recommend I move data from an existing instance?
The Cloud Sync feature will allow you to move data to and from instances easily. The main benefit is that you can move data around while the machine is inactive. Currently, we support Google Drive, S3, Dropbox, and Backblaze
Help, I want to move my data but I forgot what directory it’s in!
For moving your data, by either using our Cloud Sync or Instance Copy features, you will need to define the path from where the data you are transferring is coming from and where it is to be put. If you don’t remember where the data is you are trying to transfer, you can use our CLI execute command to access your instance when your instance access is limited.
What if I don’t remember the file names on my inactive instance, but I want to copy certain files?
Use the vast CLI, run the execute command to display the file tree. This will help you browse the available files and identify the names or paths you need. More about the execute command you can find here.
vastai execute INSTANCE_ID 'ls -l'
How I can free up disk space on an inactive instance?
When an instance is inactive (stopped, exited, cannot be started), you can still manage its file system and remove unneeded data using vast CLI. This is useful if you want to free up disk space without starting the instance.
Check disk usage:
vastai execute INSTANCE_ID 'du -d1 -h'
Delete unnecessary files:
vastai execute INSTANCE_ID 'rm file_name.txt'</content>
Cloud Sync:
<content>This feature appears as:
“Cloud Copy” button in the web interface
vastai cloud copy command in the CLI
“Cloud Sync” in the documentation navigation
All refer to the same feature for syncing data with cloud storage providers.
WARNING
Cloud Sync is only supported on Docker-based instances. Cloud Sync is not currently supported on VM-based instances (instances created using a vastai/kvm repository template)
Cloud Sync Integrations allow you to move data freely to and from instances on Vast.
In order to move data from cloud providers to Vast instances you must provide certain credentials which will be temporarily moved onto your instance which is stored on a host machine. For this reason you should only use cloud integration options when using verified hosts that are datacenters. You can filters for these hosts using the command line interface or on the website instance creation page using the ‘Secure Cloud’ checkbox.
Google Drive
WARNING
Note that Vast will connect at the account level. Therefore it is recommended for users to have a dedicated Google Drive for Vast use cases rather than using their personal account.
Prerequisites: Have an active Google Drive account
Navigate to your account page
On the bottom you should see a button that says Connect to Google Drive
Enter a name for your integration with Google Drive.
Submit the name, after which a new tab should open up asking if you would like to give Vast access to your Google Drive.
Once the verification prompt has been accepted, you will be redirected back to vast with your Google Drive fully integrated.
Gdrive
You have now connected your Google Drive with Vast. This will allow you to move data to and from instances even while inactive.
Amazon S3
Prerequisites: An active Amazon Web Services (AWS) account.
WARNING
We do not recommend using an existing IAM user on Vast. Vast connects on a user level rather than an account level, so it’s best to create a new IAM user with the intended authorization for the data you want to store on vast.ai servers.
Create a S3 Bucket in AWS
Create an IAM User and Grant Access to the S3 Bucket, we recommend you create a user with access to your specific bucket for this process rather than full access.
Awss3
Once the user is created, click the user and go Security credentials.
Click Create access key, and enable for Command Line interface
Once the access key is created, you will be prompted with an Access Key, and a Secret access Key. This will be the information required to use your AWS user permissions on Vast.
Navigate to your account page
On the bottom you should see a button that says Connect to Amazon S3
Enter your credentials in the given fields, as well as a name for your integration with Amazon.
You have now connected an Amazon Web Services user with Vast. This will allow you to move files from services like Amazon S3 to and from instances on Vast.
Backblaze
WARNING
Note that Vast connects to cloud providers at the account level. Any bucket your application key has access to will be accessible with Vast. This can cause security concerns with some use cases that should be dealt with by creating a new application key used specifically for data you want to store on vast.ai servers.
Create a bucket in Backblaze. It should not matter if the bucket is private or public.
Go to Application Keys
Select Add a New Application Key
Grant access for Read and Write operations on the bucket of your choice
Note the keyId and the applicationKey that are returned to you. This is the data required for Vast.
Navigate to your account page
On the bottom you should see a button that says Connect to Backblaze
Enter your credentials in the given fields, as well as a name for your integration with Backblaze.
You have now connected your Backblaze account with Vast. This will allow you to move data to and from Instances easily.
Dropbox
WARNING
Note that Vast will connect at the account level. Therefore it is recommended for users to have dedicated dropbox accounts for Vast use cases rather than using their personal account.
Navigate to your account page
On the bottom you should see a button that says Connect to Dropbox
Enter a name for your integration with Dropbox.
Submit the name, after which a new tab should open up asking if you would like to give Vast access to your Dropbox.
Once the verification prompt has been accepted, you will be redirected back to vast with dropbox fully integrated.
You have now connected your Dropbox account with Vast. This will allow you to move data to and from Instances seamlessly.</content>
Scheduled Cloud Backups:
<content>Introduction
This guide walks you through setting up and running automated backups for your Vast.ai container instances to cloud storage. Cloud backups can you help preserve your work when using Vast’s Docker-based instances. With proper backup strategies, you can ensure your valuable data remains safe and accessible even if your instance goes offline.
Prerequisites
A Vast.ai account
Access to a Vast.ai Docker-based instance
Cloud storage connection set up in Vast.ai
(Optional) Install and use vast-cli
(Optional) Understanding of how to use cron in computers with Unix-like OS
Setup
1. Setting Up Cloud Storage Connections
Before creating backup jobs, you need to ensure you have a cloud storage connection set up in your Vast.ai account. You can view your existing connections using the vast-cli:
python3 vast.py show connections

ID     NAME                          Cloud Type
19447  karthik_vast_ai_google_drive  drive
If you don’t have a connection yet, you’ll need to set one up in Vast.ai’s Settings page before proceeding with backup operations.
2. Understanding Backup Options
Vast.ai provides multiple approaches to schedule data backups:
Using Vast’s job scheduling system via CLI - Create hourly, daily, or weekly automated backup jobs
Using cron on your personal computer - Schedule backups with custom timing from your local machine
Both approaches have their advantages depending on your workflow and requirements.
Backup Methods
1. Using CLI for Scheduled Backups
The vast-cli tool allows you to create scheduled backup jobs with several timing options. The basic structure of a scheduled backup command includes these parameters:
--schedule SCHEDULE      Values: HOURLY, DAILY, WEEKLY
--start_date START_DATE  Start date in format 'YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS PM' (UTC) 
--end_date END_DATE      End date in format 'YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS PM' (UTC) 
--day DAY                Day of week (0-6, where 0=Sunday) or "*"
--hour HOUR              Hour of day (0-23) or "*"
You can run this command to see more details about these parameters:
python3 vast.py cloud copy --help
Let’s explore the different scheduling options:
To create a weekly backup job that runs every Saturday at 9 PM UTC:
python3 vast.py cloud copy --src /workspace --dst /backups/19015821_backups/ --instance 19015821 --connection 19447 --transfer "Instance To Cloud" --schedule WEEKLY --day 6 --hour 21
In this command:
—src /workspace specifies the source directory on your instance
—dst /backups/19015821_backups/ is the destination folder in your cloud storage
—instance 19015821 is your instance’s ID
—connection 19447 is your cloud storage connection ID
—day 6 represents Saturday (0=Sunday, 1=Monday, etc.)
—hour 21 represents 9 PM UTC (0=12am UTC, 1=1am UTC, etc.)
For daily backups at a specific hour (e.g., 9 PM UTC every day):
python3 vast.py cloud copy --src /workspace --dst /backups/19015821_backups/ --instance 19015821 --connection 19447 --transfer "Instance To Cloud" --schedule DAILY --day "*" --hour 21
The —day ”*” parameter indicates that the job should run every day.
For hourly backups that run every hour of every day:
python3 vast.py cloud copy --src /workspace --dst /backups/19015821_backups/ --instance 19015821 --connection 19447 --transfer "Instance To Cloud" --schedule HOURLY --day "*" --hour "*"
Setting both —day ”*” and —hour ”*” along with —schedule HOURLY makes the job run every hour.
To update your backup schedule, simply run the same command with the new schedule. The system will prompt you for confirmation, and upon acceptance, it will update the schedule accordingly.
Existing scheduled job found. Do you want to update it (y|n)? y
add_scheduled_job update: success - Scheduling DAILY job to cloud copy from 1745599087.0 to 1746599887.0
2. Using Cron on Your Personal Linux Computer
If you prefer more granular control over your backup schedule, you can use cron on your local Linux or Mac computer. This approach allows for customized schedules beyond the hourly/daily/weekly options.
First, open your crontab file for editing:
crontab -e
Then, add a line that specifies your backup schedule. For example, to run a backup every 4 hours:
0 */4 * * * python3 vast.py cloud copy --src /workspace --dst /backups/19015821_backups/ --instance 19015821 --connection 19447 --transfer 'Instance To Cloud'
In this cron schedule:
0 represents the minute (0th minute of the hour)
*/4 means “every 4 hours”
The three asterisks * * * represent day of month, month, and day of week, indicating “every day”
Viewing Scheduled Backup Jobs
To see all your currently scheduled backup jobs:
python3 vast.py show scheduled-jobs
Example output:
Bash
Scheduled Job ID  Instance ID  API Endpoint              Start (Date/Time in UTC)  End (Date/Time in UTC)  Day of the Week  Hour of the Day in UTC  Minute of the Hour  Frequency
1                 19778412     /api/v0/commands/rclone/  2025-04-24/23:38          2028-05-06/23:38        Everyday         4_PM                    00                  DAILY
2                 19782577     /api/v0/commands/rclone/  2025-04-29/23:47          2025-05-09/23:47        Wednesday        10_AM                   00                  WEEKLY
3                 19757389     /api/v0/commands/rclone/  2025-05-01/00:04          2026-05-01/00:04        Everyday         Every_hour              00                  HOURLY   
Understanding the Output
Field
Description
Scheduled Job ID
Unique identifier for your job (needed for deletion)
Instance ID
The instance this job is associated with
API Endpoint
The endpoint being called (rclone is used for backups to cloud storage)
Start (Date/Time)
Start date/time of period when this scheduled job will be executed (in UTC)
End (Date/Time)
End date/time of period when this scheduled job will be executed (in UTC). Default is the end of the contract.
Day of the Week
Which day the job runs (can be specific day like “Wednesday”, “Saturday”, or “Everyday”)
Hour of the Day
At what hour the job runs (formatted as 1_PM, 11_PM, 8_PM in UTC, etc.)
Minute of the Hour
At what minute of the specified hour the job runs (00, 33, 10, etc.)
Frequency
How often the job runs (HOURLY, DAILY, WEEKLY)
Examples Explained:
Job 1: A DAILY backup that runs every day at 4:00 PM UTC
Runs daily at the same time
Will continue running from Apr 24, 2025 until May 6, 2028
Job 2: A WEEKLY backup that runs on Wednesdays at 10:00 AM UTC
Runs only on Wednesdays at 10:00 AM UTC
Short duration job (Apr 29 - May 9, 2025)
Job 3: A HOURLY backup that runs every hour of every day
Runs every hour (1_AM, 2_AM, 3_AM, etc.)
Will continue running for a year
Deleting Scheduled Backup Jobs
If you need to remove a scheduled backup job that you no longer want to run, you can use the delete scheduled-job command followed by the job ID:
Bash
python3 vast.py delete scheduled-job JOB_ID
For example:
Bash
python3 vast.py delete scheduled-job 4462309
This will completely remove the scheduled job from the system. When successful, you’ll receive a confirmation message:
Bash
{'success': True, 'msg': 'Scheduled job 4462309 deleted successfully'}
Find Job IDs to Delete
To find the ID of the job you want to delete, first run:
Bash
python3 vast.py show scheduled-jobs
You’ll see output similar to:
Bash
Scheduled Job ID  Instance ID  API Endpoint              Start (Date/Time)  End (Date/Time)   Day of the Week  Hour of the Day  Minute of the Hour  Frequency
4462317           19281511     /api/v0/commands/rclone/  2025-04-08/09:01   2028-06-08/18:48  Everyday         1_PM             33                  DAILY    
4462321           19489711     /api/v0/commands/rclone/  2025-04-15/20:00   2025-04-19/20:00  Saturday         11_PM            00                  WEEKLY   
4462322           19490133     /api/v0/commands/rclone/  2025-04-15/20:00   2025-04-19/20:00  Wednesday        8_PM             10                  WEEKLY 
The scheduled_job_id column in the output contains the IDs you’ll need for deletion.
Best Practices
Choose the Right Backup Frequency
Consider these factors when determining how often to back up your data:
How frequently your data changes
The criticality of your data
The cost of data loss
The performance impact of backup operations
The bandwidth costs of backing your data up in cloud storage
Back Up Only What You Need
Be selective about what you back up to save time and storage costs:
Focus on backing up only important data (models, results, custom code)
Verify Your Backups
Periodically check that your backups are working correctly:
Download a sample backup from cloud storage and verify its contents
Check logs for any cloud copy failures
Test the restoration process before you actually need it
If contract is extended, update end_date of scheduled job
Conclusion
Setting up regular backups for your Vast.ai instances can be a valuable part of a robust workflow. By choosing the appropriate backup method and schedule, you can ensure that your valuable work remains safe and accessible regardless of instance lifecycle events.
Remember that the best backup system is one that you set up before you need it. Take time now to implement a backup strategy that meets your needs, and you can thank yourself later.
Additional Resources
Vast.ai Documentation
Vast.ai CLI Repository
Cron Job Documentation</content>
Serverless Overview:
<content>Vast Serverless is an AI infrastructure platform that lets you run compute-intensive workloads without managing GPUs, paying for execution rather than GPU rental time. It is best suited for bursty workloads such as on-demand inference, batch jobs, and other usage patterns with variable or unpredictable demand. Interacting with Vast Serverless is made easy through a powerful python SDK.
In addition to the standard benefits of using a serverless infrastructure, Vast Serverless provides further cost optimization through benchmarking to take advantage of the most cost-efficient GPUs in Vast’s marketplace.
This enables better, more-cost effective scaling, but does require an evaluation period for each newly created endpoint to benchmark each workload against different GPU classes.
Unique Features
Benchmark-driven scaling: Automatic identification and recruitment of the best price-performance GPU to scale your unique workload.
One endpoint, mixed hardware: Automatically leverage Vast’s wide fleet of GPUs (from consumer-grade to the highest-end GPUs) to serve your needs, with a minimum of overhead.
Fine-grain control and transparency: Precise configurability and observability over your infrastructure gives unmatched control.
This guide introduces users to Vast Serverless concepts and best practices on how to achieve optimal configuration for your application.</content>
Architecture:
Architecture Overview:
<content>The Vast.ai Serverless architecture is a multi-component system that manages GPU-backed workers to efficiently serve applications. It automatically scales up or down based on endpoint parameters, workergroup parameters, and measured load reported by workers.
Serverless Architecture
Primary Components
Endpoints
An Endpoint is the highest-level construct in Vast Serverless. Endpoints are configured with endpoint-level parameters that control scaling behavior, capacity limits, and utilization targets.
An endpoint consists of:
A named endpoint identifier
Typically one workergroup
Endpoint parameters such as max_workers, min_load, min_workers, cold_mult, min_cold_load, target_util, inactivity_timeout, max_queue_time, and target_queue_time
Users typically create one endpoint per use case (for example, text generation or image generation) and per environment (production, staging, development). Each endpoint acts as a router and load balances requests across its pool of managed workers based on worker queue time.
Workergroups
A Workergroup defines what code runs on the endpoint (via the template), as well as how workers are recruited and created. Workergroups are configured with workergroup-level parameters and are responsible for selecting which GPU offers are eligible for worker creation.
Each Workergroup includes:
A serverless-compatible template (referenced by template_id or template_hash)
Hardware and marketplace filters defined via search_params
Optional instance configuration overrides via launch_args
Hardware requirements such as gpu_ram
A set of GPU instances (workers) created from the template
Multiple Workergroups can exist within a single Endpoint, each with different configurations. For most users, a single Workergroup is sufficient and recommended. Advanced use cases such as mixed-model serving and hardware comparisons can be enabled with multiple Workergorups. For such use cases, please contact Vast for assistance and best practices.
Workers
Workers are individual GPU instances created and managed by the Serverless engine. Each worker runs a PyWorker, a Python web server that monitors the inference server’s readiness, proxies incoming requests, and coordinates with the autoscaler.
Workers can exist in active or inactive states and are responsible for:
Receiving and processing inference requests
Reporting performance metrics (load, utilization, benchmark results)
Informing automated scaling and routing decisions
Serverless Engine
The Serverless Engine is the decision-making service that routes incoming requests and manages workers across all endpoints and workergroups. Using configuration parameters and real-time metrics, it determines when to:
Recruit new workers
Activate inactive workers
Release or destroy workers
The engine continuously evaluates cost-performance tradeoffs using automated performance testing and measured load.
SDK
The Serverless SDK is the primary interface for interacting with Vast Serverless. It is a Python pip package that abstracts low-level details and manages:
Authentication
Request queuing, retries, and error handling
Asynchronous request management
Worker status and lifecycle information
While CLI and API access are available, the SDK is the recommended method for most applications.
Example Workflow
The client application sends a request using the Serverless SDK.
The Serverless system routes the request and returns a suitable worker address based on current load and capacity.
The client sends the request directly to the selected worker’s API endpoint, including the required authentication data.
The PyWorker running on the GPU instance forwards the request to the machine learning model and performs inference.
The inference result is returned to the client application.
Independently and continuously, each PyWorker reports operational and performance metrics back to the Serverless Engine, which uses this data to make ongoing scaling decisions.</content>
The PyWorker:
<content>The Vast PyWorker is a Python web server designed to run alongside a machine learning model instance, providing serverless compatibility. It serves as the primary entry point for API requests, forwarding them to the model’s API hosted on the same instance. Additionally, it monitors performance metrics and estimates current workload, reporting these metrics to the serverless system.
All of Vast’s serverless templates use the Vast PyWorker. If you are using a recommended serverless template from Vast, the PyWorker is already integrated with the template and will automatically startup when a Workergroup is created.
In the diagram’s example, a user’s client is attempting to infer from a machine learning model. With Vast’s Serverless setup, the client:
Sends a /route/ POST request to the serverless engine. This asks the system for a GPU instance to send the inference request.
The serverless system selects a ready and available worker instance from the user’s endpoint and replies with a JSON object containing the URL of the selected instance.
The client then constructs a new POST request with it’s payload, authentication data, and the URL of the worker instance. This is sent to the worker.
The PyWorker running on that specific instance validates the request and extracts the payload. It then sends the payload to the model inference server, which runs on the same instance as the PyWorker.
The model generates it’s output and returns the result to the PyWorker.
The PyWorker formats the model’s response as needed, and sends the response back to the client.
Independently and concurrently, the PyWorker periodically sends it’s operational metrics to the serverless system, which is used to make scaling decisions.
The Vast PyWorker repository gives examples that are useful for learning how to create a custom PyWorker for your custom template and integrate with Vast’s Serverless system. Even with a custom PyWorker, the PyWorker code runs on your Vast instance, and we automate its installation and activation during instance creation. The graphic below shows how the files and entities for the Serverless system are organized.
Integration with Model Instance
The Vast PyWorker wraps the backend code of the model instance you are running. The PyWorker calls the appropriate backend function when the PyWorker’s corresponding API endpoint is invoked. For example, if you are running a text generation inference (TGI) server, your PyWorker might receive the following JSON body from a /generate endpoint:
JSON
{
  "auth_data": {
    "signature": "a_base64_encoded_signature_string_from_route_endpoint",
    "cost": 256,
    "endpoint": "Your-TGI-Endpoint-Name",
    "reqnum": 1234567890,
    "url": "http://worker-ip-address:port",
    "request_idx": 10203040
  },
  "payload": {
    "inputs": "What is the answer to the universe?",
    "parameters": {
      "max_new_tokens": 256,
      "temperature": 0.7,
      "top_p": 0.9,
      "do_sample": true
    }
  }
}
When it receives this request, your PyWorker will internally send the following to the TGI model sever:
JSON
{
  "inputs": "What is the answer to the universe?",
  "parameters": {
    "max_new_tokens": 256,
    "temperature": 0.7,
    "top_p": 0.9,
    "do_sample": true
  }
}
Your PyWorker would similarily receive the output result from the TGI server, and forward a formatted version to the client.</content>
The SDK:
<content>The Vast Serverless SDK is a Python pip package that provides tools for both creating serverless endpoints and sending and managing requests to those endpoints. It abstracts much of the complexity of interacting with the serverless engine and individual workers.
What the SDK Handles
The SDK manages the following core functions for the client:
Authentication
All communication between the client, endpoints, and individual workers
Request queuing
Error handling and retries
Creating and managing asynchronous sessions
Providing worker status and lifecycle information
Why Use the SDK
While there are other ways to interact with serverless endpoint — such as the CLI and the REST API — the SDK is the most powerful and easiest method to use as it incorporates all best practices for using the API. It is the recommended approach for most applications due to its higher-level abstractions, reliability, and ease of integration into Python-based workflows.
If the Python SDK or CLI are not usable for your application, please contact support to request further assistance. We’re happy to help.</content>
OpenAI API-compatible Interface:
<content>Vast provides an OpenAI API-compatible proxy service that lets you point any application or library that works with the OpenAI API at a Vast Serverless vLLM endpoint instead. If your code already uses the OpenAI Python client (or any OpenAI-compatible HTTP client), you can switch to Vast by changing two values: the API key and the base URL.
Prerequisites
A Vast.ai account with a valid API key. You can find your key on the Account page.
An active Serverless endpoint running the vLLM template. See the Quickstart guide to create one.
How It Works
Vast runs a lightweight proxy at openai.vast.ai that accepts requests in the OpenAI API format and routes them to your Serverless vLLM endpoint. Your client sends a standard OpenAI request, the proxy translates it into a Vast Serverless call, and the response is returned in the OpenAI format your client expects.
This means frameworks and tools built on the OpenAI SDK — such as LangChain, LlamaIndex, or custom chat applications — can use Vast Serverless without any code changes beyond updating credentials.
Migrating from OpenAI (or Another Provider)
If you already have an application that calls the OpenAI API (or another OpenAI-compatible provider such as Together AI, Anyscale, or a self-hosted vLLM instance), migration requires only two changes:
Setting Before After
API Key Your OpenAI / provider key Your Vast API key
Base URL https://api.openai.com/v1 (or provider URL) https://openai.vast.ai/<ENDPOINT_NAME>
Replace <ENDPOINT_NAME> with the name of your Serverless endpoint. No other code changes are required — the proxy accepts the same request and response schema for the supported endpoints.
The model field is required by the OpenAI SDK but is ignored by the proxy. The model served is determined entirely by the MODEL_NAME environment variable set in your vLLM endpoint configuration. You can pass any string (including an empty string) for this field.
Python (OpenAI SDK)
JavaScript (OpenAI SDK)
cURL
from openai import OpenAI

client = OpenAI(
    api_key="<YOUR_VAST_API_KEY>",
    base_url="https://openai.vast.ai/<ENDPOINT_NAME>",
)

response = client.chat.completions.create(
    model="",  # model is determined by your endpoint configuration
    messages=[
        {"role": "system", "content": "You are a helpful assistant."},
        {"role": "user", "content": "Explain serverless computing in two sentences."},
    ],
    max_tokens=256,
    temperature=0.7,
)

print(response.choices[0].message.content)
Supported Endpoints
The proxy supports the following OpenAI-compatible endpoints exposed by vLLM:
Endpoint Description
/v1/chat/completions Multi-turn conversational completions
/v1/completions Single-prompt text completions
Both endpoints support streaming ("stream": true).
For detailed request/response schemas and parameters, see the vLLM template documentation.
Limitations
The OpenAI-compatible proxy is designed for text-in, text-out workloads only. Review the limitations below before integrating.
Text only
The proxy supports text inputs and text outputs only. The following OpenAI features are not supported:
Vision / image inputs — Passing images via image_url in message content is not supported.
Audio inputs and outputs — The /v1/audio endpoints (speech, transcription, translation) are not available.
Image generation — The /v1/images endpoint is not available.
Embeddings — The /v1/embeddings endpoint is not available through the proxy.
vLLM-specific differences from the OpenAI specification
Because the proxy routes to a vLLM backend rather than OpenAI’s own service, there are inherent differences between the two:
Tokenization — Token counts may differ from OpenAI models because vLLM uses the tokenizer bundled with the open-source model (e.g., Qwen, Llama). This can affect billing estimates and max_tokens behavior.
Streaming chunk boundaries — While the proxy uses the same Server-Sent Events (SSE) format, the exact boundaries of streamed chunks may differ. Some chunks may contain empty strings when chunked prefill is enabled.
Tool / function calling — Tool calling is supported on models that are fine-tuned for it, but behavior may differ from OpenAI’s implementation. The parallel_tool_calls parameter is not supported. See the vLLM template documentation for details.
Unsupported parameters — The following request parameters are accepted but ignored: user, suffix, and image_url.detail.
Response fields — vLLM may return additional fields not present in the OpenAI specification (e.g., kv_transfer_params). Standard OpenAI client libraries will safely ignore these.
Moderation — No content moderation layer is applied. OpenAI’s /v1/moderations endpoint is not available.</content>
Automated Performance Testing:
<content>Vast Serverless relies on benchmark testing to determine the most cost-effective GPU when scaling up (which workers to recruit), routing requests (which workers have available capacity), and scaling down (which workers to release).
This benchmark is part of the PyWorker configuration within the SDK and is an integral component of how Vast Serverless operates.
How Benchmark Testing Works
When a new Workergroup is created, the serverless engine enters a learning phase. During this phase, it recruits a variety of machine types from those specified in search_params. Each new worker runs the user-configured benchmark and evaluates performance, which are reported to the serverless engine.
As traffic scales up and down, the serverless engine builds an application-specific understanding of cost vs. performance, which it then uses to make informed decisions about future worker recruitment and release.
Best Practices for Initial Scaling
The speed at which the serverless engine “settles” into the most cost-effective mix of workers can vary depending on how quickly workers are recruited and released. Because of this, it is recommended to apply a test load during the first day of operation to help the system efficiently explore and converge on optimal hardware choices.
Best practice is to scale to double the number of expected required workers, then scale back down, 3 separate times.
Simulating Load
For examples of how to simulate load against your endpoint, see the client examples in the Vast SDK repository:
https://github.com/vast-ai/vast-sdk/blob/main/examples/client/vllm_load_example.py</content>
Deployments:
Deployments Overview:
<content>Deployments are currently in beta. APIs and behavior may change as the feature evolves.
Installation
To get started with Deployments, install the Vast SDK:
pip install vastai_sdk
Vast Deployments let you run Python functions on remote GPUs with a single decorator. You define everything in one .py file (your code, your Docker image, your GPU requirements, and your autoscaling settings), and the SDK handles packaging, uploading, provisioning workers, and routing function calls automatically.
Why Deployments?
Deployments abstract away the infrastructure of GPU serverless computing. Instead of configuring endpoints, workergroups, and PyWorkers separately, you write Python functions and call them as if they were local. Under the hood, the SDK:
Packages and uploads your code to the cloud
Creates a managed Serverless endpoint and workergroup
Provisions GPU workers with your specified image and requirements
Installs packages, loads secrets, and runs startup scripts
Routes function calls to ready workers and returns results
Core Concepts
@remote Functions
The @remote decorator marks an async Python function for remote execution. When you call it from your local machine, the SDK serializes the arguments, routes the call to a GPU worker, executes the function, and returns the result — all through a single await call.
from vastai import Deployment

app = Deployment(name="my-app")

@app.remote(benchmark_dataset=[{"x": 2}])
async def square(x):
    return x * x
@context Classes
Context classes load heavy resources (models, engines, connections) once at worker startup and make them available to all remote function calls. This avoids reloading a model on every request.
@app.context()
class MyModel:
    async def __aenter__(self):
        self.model = load_model()
        return self
    async def __aexit__(self, *exc):
        pass
Image Configuration
The Image object configures the Docker image, pip/apt packages, environment variables, GPU requirements, and startup scripts for your workers.
image = app.image("vastai/pytorch:@vastai-automatic-tag", 16)
image.pip_install("torch", "transformers")
image.require(gpu_name.in_([RTX_4090, RTX_5090]))
Benchmarks
Each deployment defines a benchmark that runs when workers start up. The benchmark measures worker performance, which the autoscaler uses to determine capacity and make scaling decisions.
Minimal Example
Here is a complete deployment in a single file:
# deploy.py
from vastai import Deployment
from vastai.data.query import gpu_name, RTX_4090, RTX_5090

app = Deployment(name="square")

@app.remote(benchmark_dataset=[{"x": 2}])
async def square(x):
    return x * x

image = app.image("vastai/base-image:@vastai-automatic-tag", 16)
image.require(gpu_name.in_([RTX_4090, RTX_5090]))
app.configure_autoscaling(min_load=1000)
app.ensure_ready()
And a client that calls it:
# client.py
import asyncio
from deploy import app, square

async def main():
    result = await square(5)  # Executes on a remote GPU, returns 25
    print(result)

asyncio.run(main())
Next Steps
Architecture
Understand how deploy mode, serve mode, and update tiers work
Configuring Deployments
Image, packages, GPU requirements, autoscaling, and environment setup
@remote Functions
Define, call, and benchmark remote GPU functions
@context Classes
Load models and resources once at worker startup</content>
Architecture Overview:
<content>Vast Deployments operate in two distinct modes depending on where the code is running. On your local machine, the SDK runs in deploy mode — packaging, uploading, and orchestrating. On remote GPU workers, it runs in serve mode — loading contexts, running benchmarks, and executing your functions.
Deploy Mode
When you import and call a function from your deployment file, the SDK handles everything needed to get your code running on remote GPUs:
Packaging: All files, secrets, and scripts associated with your deployment are bundled into a tarball
Hashing: A SHA-256 content hash determines whether anything has changed since the last deploy
Registration: The deployment configuration is sent to the Vast API
Uploading: If the code has changed, the tarball is uploaded to cloud storage
Provisioning: A managed Serverless endpoint and workergroup are created according to your autoscaling settings
This all happens automatically when you call app.ensure_ready().
Serve Mode
When your Serverless workers start up, they enter serve mode:
Download: Workers pull your deployment code from cloud storage
Install: Pip packages, apt packages, and startup scripts are executed
Context loading: All @context classes have their __aenter__() methods called in parallel
Benchmarking: The worker runs the benchmark defined on your @remote function to produce a performance score
Ready: The worker begins accepting and executing remote function calls
Calling @remote Functions
When you call a @remote function from your client code:
The SDK waits for the deployment to be set up and for workers to be ready
Function arguments are serialized and routed to the quickest available worker
The worker deserializes the arguments, executes the function with full GPU access and loaded contexts
The return value is serialized and sent back to your local function call
A full round-trip HTTP request to a load-balanced, distributed GPU endpoint is abstracted into a single await call.
Update Tiers
Whenever you make changes to your deployment, the SDK determines the minimal update required to get your latest code onto your live endpoint.
Tier 0: No Changes
If your deployment is identical to the last time you ran it, no changes are needed and you connect to your endpoint immediately.
Tier 1: Autoscaling Changes
If the deployed code and settings are the same but you are tweaking autoscaling parameters, the SDK updates your endpoint and workergroup settings without re-uploading code or restarting workers.
Tier 2: Code Changes
If you change the contents of code, scripts, or package requirements — but don’t change the image, environment variables, search filters, or secrets — a soft-update is issued. This uploads the updated code and signals your endpoint to pull the latest version and reinstall requirements, without destroying existing workers.
Tier 3: Image Changes
If your Docker image has changed, or you need to run fresh with new environment variables, the SDK issues a hard-update. This re-uses the same workers but updates their image. It takes longer than a soft-update since it may require pulling a new Docker image and re-populating worker storage.
Tier 4: Forced Redeploy
This happens when the tag of your Deployment changes. It creates an entirely new Serverless endpoint and workergroup with separate routing. Use this when a new version of your deployment is not backwards compatible with workers serving an older version. It requires recruiting entirely new workers.
Deployment Lifecycle
By default, deployments and their endpoints exist indefinitely after a client first sets them up. You can configure automatic teardown after a specified number of seconds since the last client connection using the ttl parameter:
app = Deployment(name="my-app", ttl=3600)  # Tear down after 1 hour of inactivity</content>
Configuring Deployments:
<content>A deployment’s configuration covers everything needed to run your code on remote GPU workers: the Docker image, installed packages, hardware requirements, environment variables, startup scripts, and autoscaling behavior.
The Deployment Object
from vastai import Deployment

app = Deployment(
    name="my-deployment",       # Deployment name (auto-detected from module if omitted)
    tag="default",              # Version tag for routing (changing triggers a Tier 4 redeploy)
    version_label=None,         # Optional semantic version label
    api_key=...,                # Vast API key (uses $VAST_API_KEY env var if omitted)
    ttl=None,                   # Auto-teardown after N seconds of no client connections (None = live forever)
)
Parameter Type Default Description
name str | None None Deployment name. Auto-set from the module name of the first @remote function if omitted.
tag str "default" Version tag. Changing this triggers a full redeploy (Tier 4) with a new endpoint.
version_label str | None None Optional semantic version label for tracking.
api_key str env var Your Vast API key. Reads from $VAST_API_KEY if not provided.
ttl float | None None Seconds of inactivity before auto-teardown. None means the deployment lives indefinitely.
Image Configuration
app.image() returns an Image object for configuring the Docker image, packages, and hardware requirements. All methods return self for chaining.
image = app.image(from_image, storage)
Parameter Type Default Description
from_image str required Docker image URI (e.g. "vastai/pytorch:@vastai-automatic-tag")
storage float 50 Storage allocation in GB
Installing Packages
image.pip_install("torch==2.0.0", "transformers", "accelerate")
image.apt_get("ffmpeg", "libsndfile1")
Environment Variables
image.env(MODEL_NAME="Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B", DEBUG="true")
Startup Scripts and Commands
# Run a shell script string
image.run_script("echo 'Starting up...' && mkdir -p /data")

# Run a command with arguments
image.run_cmd("wget", "-O", "/data/model.bin", "https://example.com/model.bin")
Copying Local Files
image.copy("./local_config.json", "/app/config.json")
Files added with .copy() are bundled into the deployment tarball and placed at the specified destination path on workers.
Python Environment
By default, the SDK manages its own virtual environment on workers. You can override this:
# Use an existing venv from the Docker image
image.venv("/venv/main")

# Use the image's system Python directly
image.use_system_python()
Publishing Additional Ports
image.publish_port(8080, "tcp")
image.publish_port(8443, "tcp")
Image Methods Reference
Method Description
pip_install(*packages) Install pip packages on worker startup
apt_get(*packages) Install apt packages on worker startup
env(**kwargs) Set environment variables
run_script(script_str) Run a shell script on startup
run_cmd(*args) Run a command on startup
copy(src, dst) Copy local files into the deployment bundle
venv(path) Use an existing venv at the given path
use_system_python() Use the image’s system Python instead of a venv
publish_port(number, type_) Publish additional ports on the worker
require(*queries) Set GPU/hardware search requirements
GPU and Hardware Requirements
Hardware requirements are specified using the query builder from vastai.data.query. Pass Query objects to image.require():
from vastai.data.query import gpu_name, gpu_ram, cpu_cores, RTX_4090, RTX_5090, H100_SXM

# Require specific GPUs
image.require(gpu_name.in_([RTX_4090, RTX_5090]))

# Require minimum specs
image.require(gpu_ram >= 48, cpu_cores >= 16)

# Exact match
image.require(gpu_name == H100_SXM)
Query Operators
Operator Example Description
== gpu_name == RTX_4090 Equals
!= gpu_name != RTX_3090 Not equals
< dph_total < 2.0 Less than
<= gpu_ram <= 24 Less than or equal
> inet_down > 500 Greater than
>= cpu_cores >= 16 Greater than or equal
.in_() gpu_name.in_([RTX_4090, H100_SXM]) Value in list
.notin_() gpu_name.notin_([RTX_3060]) Value not in list
Queryable Columns
GPU: gpu_name, gpu_ram, gpu_total_ram, gpu_max_power, gpu_max_temp, gpu_arch, gpu_mem_bw, gpu_lanes, gpu_frac, gpu_display_active, num_gpus, compute_cap, cuda_max_good, bw_nvlink, total_flops
CPU: cpu_name, cpu_cores, cpu_cores_effective, cpu_ghz, cpu_ram, cpu_arch
Storage & Disk: disk_space, disk_bw, disk_name, allocated_storage
Network: inet_up, inet_down, inet_up_cost, inet_down_cost, direct_port_count, pcie_bw, pci_gen
Pricing: dph_base, dph_total, storage_cost, storage_total_cost, vram_costperhour, min_bid, credit_discount_max, flops_per_dphtotal, dlperf_per_dphtotal
Machine & Host: host_id, machine_id, hostname, public_ipaddr, reliability, expected_reliability, os_version, driver_vers, mobo_name, has_avx, static_ip, external, verification, hosting_type, vms_enabled, resource_type, cluster_id
Virtual Columns (convenience aliases resolved by the API): geolocation, datacenter, duration, verified, allocated_storage, target_reliability
GPU Name Constants
Import GPU name constants from vastai.data.query. A selection of commonly used ones:
NVIDIA Data Center: A100_PCIE, A100_SXM4, H100_PCIE, H100_SXM, H100_NVL, H200, H200_NVL, B200, GH200_SXM, L4, L40, L40S, A10, A30, A40, Tesla_T4, Tesla_V100
NVIDIA Consumer: RTX_5090, RTX_5080, RTX_5070_Ti, RTX_5070, RTX_4090, RTX_4080S, RTX_4080, RTX_4070_Ti, RTX_4070S, RTX_3090, RTX_3090_Ti, RTX_3080_Ti, RTX_3080
NVIDIA Professional: RTX_A6000, RTX_6000Ada, RTX_5880Ada, RTX_5000Ada, RTX_PRO_6000
AMD: InstinctMI250X, InstinctMI210, InstinctMI100, RX_7900_XTX, PRO_W7900, PRO_W7800
Autoscaling Configuration
These parameters control how your deployment scales workers up and down in response to load. For a detailed explanation of how each parameter affects scaling behavior, see Serverless Parameters.
app.configure_autoscaling(
    cold_workers=2,          # Idle workers to keep ready
    max_workers=10,          # Maximum concurrent workers
    min_load=100,            # Minimum load threshold to trigger scaling
    min_cold_load=50,        # Load threshold for cold workers
    target_util=0.8,         # Target utilization ratio (0-1)
    cold_mult=2,             # Cold worker multiplier
    max_queue_time=30.0,     # Maximum seconds a request can wait in queue
    target_queue_time=5.0,   # Target queue wait time in seconds
    inactivity_timeout=300,  # Seconds of inactivity before scaling down
)
All parameters are optional. You can call configure_autoscaling() multiple times — later calls update (not replace) previously set values.
Parameter Type Description
cold_workers int Number of idle workers to keep ready
max_workers int Maximum concurrent workers
min_load int Minimum load threshold to trigger scaling
min_cold_load int Load threshold for maintaining cold workers
target_util float Target utilization ratio (0.0 to 1.0)
cold_mult int Cold worker multiplier
max_queue_time float Maximum seconds a request can wait in queue
target_queue_time float Target queue wait time in seconds
inactivity_timeout int Seconds of inactivity before scaling down
Deploying with ensure_ready()
After defining your remote functions, image configuration, and autoscaling settings, call ensure_ready() to deploy:
app.ensure_ready()
This is a synchronous, blocking call that:
Packages your deployment code and configuration into a tarball
Computes a content hash to determine if anything has changed
Registers the deployment with the Vast API
Uploads the tarball to cloud storage (if the code has changed)
Triggers the appropriate update tier if workers are already running
You must call ensure_ready() before invoking any @remote functions.</content>
@remote Functions:
<content>The @remote decorator is the core of Vast Deployments. It marks an async Python function for remote execution on GPU workers, and configures the benchmark used to measure worker performance.
Defining a @remote Function
@app.remote(benchmark_dataset=[{"x": 2}])
async def square(x):
    return x * x
Remote functions must be:
Async: Defined with async def
Serializable: All arguments and return values must be serializable (primitives, lists, dicts, bytes, and custom objects with __dict__)
Benchmarked: At least one @remote function in a deployment must define a benchmark via benchmark_dataset or benchmark_generator
Decorator Parameters
Parameter Type Default Description
benchmark_dataset list[dict] | None None Static list of sample input dicts. Keys must match the function’s parameter names.
benchmark_generator Callable[[], dict] | None None A callable returning a sample input dict. Use for dynamic or randomized test data.
benchmark_runs int 10 Number of iterations to run during the benchmark.
Calling @remote Functions
From a client script, import the deployment and the function, then await the call:
# client.py
import asyncio
from deploy import app, square

async def main():
    result = await square(5)  # Returns 25
    print(result)

asyncio.run(main())
When you call a @remote function:
The SDK waits for the deployment to be ready (workers provisioned and benchmarked)
Arguments are serialized and routed to the quickest available worker
The worker executes the function with full GPU access
The return value is serialized and sent back to the caller
Accessing @context in @remote Functions
Use app.get_context(ContextClass) to access resources loaded during worker startup:
@app.context()
class MyModel:
    async def __aenter__(self):
        import torch
        self.model = torch.load("model.pt").cuda()
        return self
    async def __aexit__(self, *exc):
        pass

@app.remote(benchmark_dataset=[{"text": "hello"}])
async def predict(text: str) -> dict:
    ctx = app.get_context(MyModel)
    result = ctx.model(text)
    return {"prediction": result}
Benchmarks
Exactly one @remote function should define a benchmark. Benchmarks run automatically before a worker first enters “ready” state and are used to measure each worker’s performance for autoscaling.
How Benchmarks Work
Warmup (enabled by default): A warmup pass runs before timing to settle caches, JIT compilation, and GPU memory allocation
Timed runs: The function is executed benchmark_runs times using inputs from the dataset or generator, with a default concurrency of 10 parallel requests
Scoring: Results produce a performance score that the autoscaler uses to determine worker capacity
Using benchmark_dataset
Provide a static list of sample inputs. During benchmarking, inputs are randomly selected from this list:
@app.remote(benchmark_dataset=[{"x": 2}, {"x": 100}, {"x": -5}])
async def square(x):
    return x * x
Each dict’s keys must match the function’s parameter names. The values should be representative of real workloads.
Using benchmark_generator
For dynamic or randomized test data, provide a callable:
import random

def gen_input():
    return {"x": random.randint(1, 1000)}

@app.remote(benchmark_generator=gen_input, benchmark_runs=20)
async def square(x):
    return x * x
You can provide either benchmark_dataset or benchmark_generator.
Workload Calculators
By default, each request counts as a fixed amount of workload for autoscaling. For functions where request cost varies significantly (e.g., different prompt lengths for an LLM), you can define a custom workload calculator that computes the load from the request payload. This allows the autoscaler to make more accurate scaling decisions based on actual request complexity rather than just request count.
Serialization
The SDK automatically handles serialization and deserialization of function arguments and return values. Supported types:
Primitives: int, str, float, bool, None
Bytes: Encoded as base64
Collections: list, tuple, dict
Custom objects: Stored with module path, class name, and __dict__
Errors raised inside remote functions are serialized and re-raised on the client side.</content>
@context Classes:
<content>The @context decorator registers an async context manager class whose lifecycle is tied to the GPU worker. Use it to load models, initialize engines, allocate GPU memory, and set up connections once at startup rather than on every request.
Defining a Context
A context class must implement the async context manager protocol — __aenter__ and __aexit__:
@app.context()
class MyModel:
    async def __aenter__(self):
        import torch
        self.model = torch.load("model.pt").cuda()
        self.device = torch.device("cuda")
        return self

    async def __aexit__(self, *exc):
        del self.model  # Cleanup on shutdown
__aenter__ runs once when the worker starts, before it enters “ready” state. Use it to load models, allocate resources, and perform any one-time setup. It must return self (or whatever object you want get_context to return).
__aexit__ runs when the worker shuts down. Use it to close connections, free resources, or flush buffers.
Passing Arguments to Context
You can pass arguments to the context class constructor via the decorator:
@app.context("Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B", max_len=512)
class LLMEngine:
    def __init__(self, model_name, max_len=1024):
        self.model_name = model_name
        self.max_len = max_len

    async def __aenter__(self):
        from vllm import AsyncLLMEngine, AsyncEngineArgs
        args = AsyncEngineArgs(model=self.model_name, max_model_len=self.max_len)
        self.engine = AsyncLLMEngine.from_engine_args(args)
        return self

    async def __aexit__(self, *exc):
        self.engine.shutdown_background_loop()
Accessing Context in @remote Functions
Use app.get_context(ContextClass) inside a remote function to retrieve the initialized context instance:
@app.remote(benchmark_dataset=[{"prompt": "Hello"}])
async def generate(prompt: str, max_tokens: int = 128) -> str:
    engine = app.get_context(LLMEngine)
    # Use engine.engine to generate text...
get_context returns the object that __aenter__ returned. If the context class hasn’t been registered or hasn’t been entered yet, it raises a KeyError.
Multiple Contexts
You can register multiple context classes. They are all entered in parallel at startup:
@app.context()
class Tokenizer:
    async def __aenter__(self):
        from transformers import AutoTokenizer
        self.tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("gpt2")
        return self
    async def __aexit__(self, *exc):
        pass

@app.context()
class Model:
    async def __aenter__(self):
        from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM
        self.model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("gpt2").cuda()
        return self
    async def __aexit__(self, *exc):
        pass

@app.remote(benchmark_dataset=[{"text": "Hello"}])
async def generate(text: str) -> str:
    tok = app.get_context(Tokenizer)
    model = app.get_context(Model)
    inputs = tok.tokenizer(text, return_tensors="pt").to("cuda")
    outputs = model.model.generate(**inputs)
    return tok.tokenizer.decode(outputs[0])
Since contexts are entered in parallel via asyncio.gather(), independent resources (like a tokenizer and a model) load concurrently, reducing total startup time.
Lifecycle
Registration (deploy time): @app.context() decorators execute and register context classes
Startup (serve time): All registered contexts’ __aenter__() methods are awaited in parallel
Serving: Remote functions access contexts via app.get_context()
Shutdown: All contexts’ __aexit__() methods are awaited in parallel</content>
Examples:
<content>The simplest possible deployment: a single function with no context or dependencies.
Deployment
# deploy.py
from vastai import Deployment
from vastai.data.query import gpu_name, RTX_4090, RTX_5090

app = Deployment(name="square")


@app.remote(benchmark_dataset=[{"x": 2}])
async def square(x):
    return x * x


app.configure_autoscaling(min_load=1000)
image = app.image("vastai/base-image:@vastai-automatic-tag", 16)
image.require(gpu_name.in_([RTX_4090, RTX_5090]))
app.ensure_ready()
Client
# client.py
import asyncio
from deploy import app, square


async def main():
    for x in range(1, 10):
        result = await square(x)
        print(f"square({x}) = {result}")


if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())
What This Demonstrates
Minimal @remote function with no dependencies
Using benchmark_dataset with a single sample input
Calling a remote function in a loop</content>
<content>This example demonstrates using @context to train a model at worker startup and then serve inference requests through a @remote function.
Deployment
# deploy.py
from vastai import Deployment
from vastai.data.query import gpu_name, RTX_4090, RTX_5090

app = Deployment(name="train-mnist")


@app.context()
class MNISTModel:
    async def __aenter__(self):
        import torch
        import torch.nn as nn
        import torch.optim as optim
        from torchvision import datasets, transforms

        class CNN(nn.Module):
            def __init__(self):
                super().__init__()
                self.conv1 = nn.Conv2d(1, 32, 3, padding=1)
                self.conv2 = nn.Conv2d(32, 64, 3, padding=1)
                self.pool = nn.MaxPool2d(2)
                self.fc1 = nn.Linear(64 * 7 * 7, 128)
                self.fc2 = nn.Linear(128, 10)
                self.relu = nn.ReLU()

            def forward(self, x):
                x = self.pool(self.relu(self.conv1(x)))
                x = self.pool(self.relu(self.conv2(x)))
                x = x.view(-1, 64 * 7 * 7)
                x = self.relu(self.fc1(x))
                return self.fc2(x)

        device = torch.device("cuda" if torch.cuda.is_available() else "cpu")
        model = CNN().to(device)
        optimizer = optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=1e-3)
        loss_fn = nn.CrossEntropyLoss()

        transform = transforms.Compose([
            transforms.ToTensor(),
            transforms.Normalize((0.1307,), (0.3081,)),
        ])
        train_data = datasets.MNIST("/tmp/mnist", train=True, download=True, transform=transform)
        loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(train_data, batch_size=64, shuffle=True)

        print("Training MNIST classifier...")
        model.train()
        for epoch in range(3):
            total_loss = 0.0
            for images, labels in loader:
                images, labels = images.to(device), labels.to(device)
                optimizer.zero_grad()
                loss = loss_fn(model(images), labels)
                loss.backward()
                optimizer.step()
                total_loss += loss.item()
            print(f"  Epoch {epoch + 1}/3  loss={total_loss / len(loader):.4f}")

        model.eval()
        self.model = model
        self.device = device
        print("Training complete. Model ready for inference.")
        return self

    async def __aexit__(self, *exc):
        pass


@app.remote(benchmark_dataset=[{"pixel_values": [[0.0] * 28] * 28}])
async def infer(pixel_values: list[list[float]]) -> dict:
    """Classify a 28x28 grayscale MNIST image.

    Args:
        pixel_values: 28x28 nested list of floats (0.0=black, 1.0=white),
                      raw pixel intensities before normalization.

    Returns:
        dict with "digit" (predicted class) and "probability" (confidence).
    """
    import torch

    ctx = app.get_context(MNISTModel)

    tensor = torch.tensor(pixel_values, dtype=torch.float32)
    tensor = (tensor - 0.1307) / 0.3081
    tensor = tensor.unsqueeze(0).unsqueeze(0).to(ctx.device)

    with torch.no_grad():
        logits = ctx.model(tensor)
        probs = torch.softmax(logits, dim=1)
        prob, digit = probs.max(dim=1)

    return {"digit": digit.item(), "probability": prob.item()}


image = app.image("vastai/pytorch:@vastai-automatic-tag", 16)
image.venv("/venv/main")
image.require(gpu_name.in_([RTX_4090, RTX_5090]))
app.configure_autoscaling(min_load=100)
app.ensure_ready()
Client
# client.py
import asyncio
import random
from deploy import app, infer


async def main():
    from torchvision import datasets, transforms

    test_data = datasets.MNIST("/tmp/mnist", train=False, download=True, transform=transforms.ToTensor())
    idx = random.randint(0, len(test_data) - 1)
    image_tensor, true_label = test_data[idx]

    pixel_values = image_tensor.squeeze(0).tolist()

    result = await infer(pixel_values)
    print(f"True label:  {true_label}")
    print(f"Predicted:   {result['digit']}")
    print(f"Confidence:  {result['probability']:.4f}")


if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())
What This Demonstrates
Using @context to train a model at worker startup
The context’s __aenter__ runs GPU-intensive work (training) before the worker enters “ready” state
Accessing the trained model in a @remote function via app.get_context()
Benchmark dataset with a representative zero-image input
Using image.venv() to point to an existing venv in the Docker image</content>
<content>This example deploys a language model using vLLM’s AsyncLLMEngine and serves text generation requests.
Deployment
# deploy.py
from vastai import Deployment
from vastai.data.query import gpu_name, RTX_4090, RTX_5090

app = Deployment(name="vllm")

MODEL = "Qwen/Qwen3-0.6B"

@app.context()
class VLLMEngine:
    async def __aenter__(self):
        from vllm import AsyncLLMEngine, AsyncEngineArgs, SamplingParams

        args = AsyncEngineArgs(model=MODEL, max_model_len=512)
        self.engine = AsyncLLMEngine.from_engine_args(args)

        # Warmup: run a dummy generation to ensure model is fully loaded
        async for _ in self.engine.generate(
            "warmup", SamplingParams(max_tokens=1), request_id="warmup"
        ):
            pass
        return self

    async def __aexit__(self, *exc):
        self.engine.shutdown_background_loop()


@app.remote(benchmark_dataset=[{"prompt": "Hello"}])
async def generate(prompt: str, max_tokens: int = 128) -> str:
    from vllm import SamplingParams
    import uuid

    engine = app.get_context(VLLMEngine)
    params = SamplingParams(max_tokens=max_tokens, temperature=0.7)
    request_id = str(uuid.uuid4())
    result = None
    async for output in engine.engine.generate(prompt, params, request_id=request_id):
        result = output
    return result.outputs[0].text


image = app.image("vastai/vllm:v0.11.0-cuda-12.8-mvc-cuda-12.0", 32)
image.use_system_python()
image.pip_install("vllm==0.11.0", "transformers==4.57.0")
image.require(gpu_name.in_([RTX_4090, RTX_5090]))
app.configure_autoscaling(min_load=100)
app.ensure_ready()
Client
# client.py
import asyncio
from deploy import app, generate

async def main():
    result = await generate("Explain quantum computing in one sentence.")
    print(f"Response: {result}")

if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())
What This Demonstrates
Using @context with vLLM’s AsyncLLMEngine for high-performance LLM serving
Warmup generation in __aenter__ to pre-allocate KV cache before benchmarking
Proper cleanup with shutdown_background_loop() in __aexit__
Using image.use_system_python() to use the image’s built-in Python environment
Specifying exact package versions for reproducibility
A simple benchmark dataset with a short prompt</content>
Quickstart:
<content>Prerequisites
Before you begin, make sure you have:
Vast.ai Account
Sign up at cloud.vast.ai and add credits to your account
API Key
Generate an API key from your account settings
HuggingFace Token
Create a HuggingFace account and generate a read-access token for gated models
Configuration
Install the Vast SDK
Install the SDK that you’ll use to interact with your serverless endpoints:
pip install vastai_sdk
The SDK provides an async Python interface for making requests to your endpoints. You’ll use this after setting up your infrastructure.
API Key Setup
Set your Vast.ai API key as an environment variable:
export VAST_API_KEY="your-api-key-here"
The SDK will automatically use this environment variable for authentication. Alternatively, you can pass the API key directly when initializing the client:
client = Serverless(api_key="your-api-key-here")
HuggingFace Token Setup
Many popular models like Llama and Mistral require authentication to download. Configure your HuggingFace token once at the account level:
Navigate to your Account Settings
Expand the “Environment Variables” section
Add a new variable:
Key: HF_TOKEN
Value: Your HuggingFace read-access token
Click the ”+” button, then “Save Edits”
This token will be securely available to all your serverless workers. You only need to set it once for your account.
Without a valid HF_TOKEN, workers will fail to download gated models and remain in “Loading” state indefinitely.
Deploy Your First Endpoint
1
Create an Endpoint
Navigate to the Serverless Dashboard and click “Get Started”.
Use these recommended settings for your first deployment:
Setting Value Description
Endpoint Name vLLM-Qwen3-8B Choose a descriptive name for your endpoint
Cold Multiplier 3 Scales capacity based on predicted load
Minimum Workers 5 Pre-loaded instances for instant scaling
Max Workers 16 Maximum GPU instances
Minimum Load 1 Baseline tokens/second instantaneous capacity
Minimum Cold Load 0 Baseline tokens/second total capacity
Target Utilization 0.9 Resource usage target (90%)
Click “Next” to proceed.
2
Create a Workergroup
You will now be taken to the Create Workergroup page.
Select the vLLM (Serverless) template, which comes pre-configured with:
Model: Qwen/Qwen3-8B (8 billion parameter LLM)
Framework: vLLM for high-performance inference
API: OpenAI-compatible endpoints
The template will automatically select appropriate GPUs with enough VRAM for the model.
Click “Create” to proceed with the default settings.
3
Wait for Workers to Initialize
Your serverless infrastructure is now being provisioned. This process takes time as workers need to:
Start up the GPU instances
Download the model (8GB for Qwen3-8B)
Load the model into GPU memory
Complete health checks
Expect 3-5 minutes wait time for workers to become ready, especially on first deployment. Larger models may take longer.
Monitor the worker status in the dashboard:
Stopped: Worker has the model loaded and is ready to activate on-demand (cold worker)
Loading: Worker is starting up and loading the model into GPU memory
Ready: Worker is active and ready to handle requests
You can view detailed statistics by clicking “View detailed stats” on the Workergroup.
Monitor the instance logs to track the loading process:
Click on the “eye” icon to view the logs for a worker
Logs show model download progress, loading status, and any startup errors
This helps identify issues early rather than waiting for timeouts
The SDK automatically holds and retries requests until workers are ready. However, for best performance, wait for at least one worker to show “Ready” or “Stopped” status before making your first call.
Make Your First API Call
Basic Usage
With the SDK installed, here’s how to make your first API call:
import asyncio
from vastai import Serverless
MAX_TOKENS = 100

async def main():
    # Initialize the client with your API key
    # The SDK will automatically use the VAST_API_KEY environment variable if set
    client = Serverless()  # Uses VAST_API_KEY environment variable

    # Get your endpoint
    endpoint = await client.get_endpoint(name="vLLM-Qwen3-8B")

    # Prepare your request payload
    payload = {
          "model": "Qwen/Qwen3-8B",
          "prompt": "Explain quantum computing in simple terms",
          "max_tokens": MAX_TOKENS,
          "temperature": 0.7
    }

    # Make the request
    result = await endpoint.request("/v1/completions", payload, cost=MAX_TOKENS)

    # The SDK returns a wrapper object with metadata
    # Access the OpenAI-compatible response via result["response"]
    print(result["response"]["choices"][0]["text"])

    # Clean up
    await client.close()

if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())
The SDK handles all the routing, worker assignment, and authentication automatically. You just need to specify your endpoint name and make requests.
Troubleshooting
Workers stuck in 'Loading' state
'No workers available' error
Slow response times
Need help? Join our Discord community or check the detailed documentation for advanced configurations.</content>
Scaling Behavior:
Endpoint Parameters:
<content>Vast Serverless offers unmatched control over endpoint scaling behavior. The following parameters control the serverless engine and are configured at the endpoint level. Below is an explanation of what these values control and guidance on how to set them.
Max Workers (max_workers)
A hard upper limit on the total number of workers (active and inactive) that the endpoint can have at any given time.
If not specified during endpoint creation, the default value is 16.
Minimum Load (min_load)
Vast Serverless utilizes a concept of load as a metric of work that is performed by a worker. Load is the computational cost of a single request.
Each worker has a perf (performance) rating, which represents its capacity or usage, measured in load per second — how much load that worker can handle per second based on benchmark tests. This perf rating is used to make scaling and capacity decisions.
For example:
A worker of 100 perf will resolve a request of 100 load in 1 second
A separate worker (on a higher performance GPU) of 200 perf will resolve that same request in 0.5 seconds
During endpoint configuration, min_load is used to set the target minimum number of active workers for the endpoint. This value can be edited on a live endpoint, and the serverless engine will work to match the new target.
Best practice for setting min_load
Start with min_load = 1 (the default), which guarantees at least one active worker
Run the benchmark test to determine measured performance
Update min_load using the following formula:
measured_performance × minimum_parallel_requests
Setting Minimum Inactive Workers
Because Vast Serverless can utilize multiple hardware types to achieve optimal cost efficiency, there are multiple methods for controlling the minimum number of inactive workers maintained by the serverless engine.
For most applications, setting min_workers is sufficient—especially when endpoints target a single GPU type.
For more advanced scaling behavior, cold_mult, min_cold_load, and target_util provide finer-grained control. The serverless engine will maintain the largest inactive capacity specified by these three controls.
Minimum Workers (min_workers)
The minimum number of workers (workers with the model loaded) that the serverless engine will maintain. This includes active and inactive workers.
If not specified during endpoint creation, the default value is 5.
Cold Multiplier (cold_mult)
While min_workers is fixed regardless of traffic patterns, cold_mult defines inactive capacity as a multiplier of the current active workload.
Example
For an active load of 100 and cold_mult = 2:
100 (active load) × 2 (cold_mult) = 200 total capacity
200 − 100 = 100 inactive load
If the active load increases to 150 with cold_mult = 2, the serverless engine will attempt to maintain 150 inactive load.
If not specified during endpoint creation, the default value is 3.
Minimum Cold Load (min_cold_load)
min_cold_load sets the total capacity target directly, independent of cold_mult.
Example
For an active load of 100 and min_cold_load = 300:
300 − 100 = 200 inactive load
If active load increases to 150 with the same min_cold_load, inactive capacity becomes 150.
If not specified during endpoint creation, the default value is 0.
Target Utilization (target_util)
Target Utilization defines the ratio of active capacity to anticipated load and determines how much spare capacity (headroom) is reserved to handle short-term traffic spikes.
For example, if anticipated load is 900 tokens/sec and target_util = 0.9, the serverless engine will maintain:
900 ÷ 0.9 = 1000 tokens/sec capacity
Spare capacity examples
target_util = 0.9 → 11.1% spare capacity
target_util = 0.8 → 25% spare capacity
target_util = 0.5 → 100% spare capacity
target_util = 0.4 → 150% spare capacity
If not specified during endpoint creation, the default value is 0.9.
Inactivity Timeout (inactivity_timeout)
An optional value (in seconds) that gates scaling to zero on the time elapsed since the last activity on the endpoint. After the specified duration of inactivity, the serverless engine is permitted to scale down to zero active workers or zero total workers, depending on your other parameter settings:
If cold_workers is set (e.g., 5), the endpoint will never scale below that number of total workers, but can reach zero active workers after the timeout.
If min_load is greater than 0, you will not reach zero active workers even after the timeout — min_load still acts as a floor.
If both cold_workers = 0 and min_load = 0, the endpoint can scale to zero total workers after the inactivity timeout.
Special values:
0 — Disable inactivity gating entirely. The endpoint scales purely based on normal autoscaling decisions.
Negative value (e.g., -1) — Never allow scaling to zero, even if min_load and cold_workers would otherwise permit it.
If not specified during endpoint creation, this parameter is not applied.
Max Queue Time (max_queue_time)
The maximum number of seconds of expected queue time allowed to build up on each individual worker. The serverless engine uses this value when routing requests: if all workers have reached their max_queue_time limit, new requests are held in a global queue until a worker has capacity.
This parameter controls how much work can be buffered on each worker before the system considers the worker “full” for routing purposes.
If not specified during endpoint creation, a system default is applied.
Target Queue Time (target_queue_time)
The acceptable queue time threshold (in seconds) across the endpoint. When observed queue times exceed this value, the serverless engine begins aggressively scaling up workers to handle the excess load.
In practice, max_queue_time defines how much each worker can absorb, while target_queue_time defines the point at which the system decides more workers are needed. Together they control the autoscaler’s sensitivity to queuing:
max_queue_time — Per-worker routing limit. “How full can each worker get?”
target_queue_time — Endpoint-wide scaling trigger. “At what queue time do we start adding workers?”
If not specified during endpoint creation, a system default is applied.</content>
Managing Scale:
<content>Managing for Bursty Load
Adjust min_workers: This will change the number of managed inactive workers, and increase capacity for high peak
Check max_workers: Ensure this parameter is set high enough for the serverless engine to create the necessary number of workers
Managing for Low Demand or Idle Periods
Adjust min_load: Reducing min_load will reduce the minimum number of active workers. Set to 1 to reduce the number to its minimum value of 1 worker, or set to 0 to put all workers into inactive states.
Adjust min_workers: This will change the number of managed inactive workers
Scaling to Zero
To allow your endpoint to fully scale to zero during idle periods, configure inactivity_timeout alongside your other scaling parameters. The inactivity_timeout value (in seconds) determines how long the endpoint must be idle before scaling down is permitted.
To scale to zero active workers (while keeping cold workers available): set min_load = 0 and configure a positive inactivity_timeout. Workers in the cold_workers pool will remain available for fast reactivation.
To scale to zero total workers: set min_load = 0, cold_workers = 0, and configure a positive inactivity_timeout. This minimizes cost during extended idle periods but incurs cold-start latency when traffic resumes.
To prevent scaling to zero regardless of other settings: set inactivity_timeout to a negative value (e.g., -1).
A value of 0 for inactivity_timeout disables inactivity-based gating entirely — the endpoint will rely solely on normal autoscaling decisions.
Managing Queue Time
Use max_queue_time and target_queue_time to control how the autoscaler responds to request queuing:
Increase max_queue_time to allow more requests to buffer on each worker before the system holds them in the global queue. This is useful for workloads with predictable, longer processing times.
Decrease target_queue_time to trigger more aggressive scale-up when queue times rise, reducing latency at the cost of potentially higher worker counts.
Increase target_queue_time to tolerate higher queue times before scaling up, reducing costs when some latency is acceptable.</content>
Workergroup Parameters:
<content>The parameters below are specific to only Workergroups, not Endpoints. Pre-configured serverless templates from Vast will have these values already set.
gpu_ram
The amount of GPU memory (VRAM) in gigabytes that your model or workload requires to run. This parameter is used by the serverless engine to estimate bandwidth requirements. The amount of GPU memory for recruited workers is specified as part of search_params.
If not specified during Workergroup creation, the default value is 24.
launch_args
A command-line style string containing additional parameters for instance creation that will be parsed and applied when the serverless engine creates new workers. This allows you to customize instance configuration beyond what’s specified in templates.
There is no default value for launch_args.
search_params
A query string, list, or dictionary that specifies the hardware and performance criteria for filtering GPU offers in the vast.ai marketplace. It uses a simple query syntax to define requirements for the machines that your Workergroup will consider when searching for workers to create.
Example (Python):
Python
{"verified": {"eq": true}, "rentable": {"eq": true}, "rented": {"eq": false}}
There is no default value for search_params. To see all available search filters, see the CLI docs.
template_hash
A unique hexadecimal identifier that references a pre-configured template containing all the configuration needed to create instances. Templates are comprehensive specifications that include the Docker image, environment variables, onstart scripts, resource requirements, and other deployment settings.
There is no default value for template_hash.
template_id
A numeric (integer) identifier that uniquely references a template in the Vast.ai database. This is an alternative way to reference the same template that template_hash points to, but using the template’s database primary key instead of its hash string.
There is no default value for template_id.</content>
Creating Custom PyWorkers:
<content>Vast’s PyWorker is a Python HTTP proxy that sits between the Vast serverless routing layer and your model server (e.g. vLLM, TGI, ComfyUI). The modern implementation is centered around a single worker.py file that constructs a Worker from a WorkerConfig.
By the end of this document you will understand:
What a PyWorker does at a high level
How worker.py is launched in the serverless environment
How to configure WorkerConfig, HandlerConfig, BenchmarkConfig, and LogActionConfig
How request parsing, response generation, workload calculation, and queueing work
How to adapt existing “legacy” PyWorkers if you have them
This page assumes you already know how to create a Serverless Endpoint and Worker Group. It focuses only on defining worker.py. See the Serverless Endpoint documentation for how to create endpoints and worker groups.
Vast publishes pre-made templates with PyWorkers already wired up. Before writing your own worker.py, check the templates in the documentation and control panel; they may already cover your use case.
How PyWorkers and worker.py fit into Serverless
On each worker instance:
The start-server script (provided by the template) runs. It is responsible for:
Cloning your repository from PYWORKER_REPO
Installing Python dependencies from requirements.txt
Starting your model server (e.g. vLLM)
Running python worker.py
worker.py:
Builds a WorkerConfig describing:
How to reach your model server (model_server_url, model_server_port, model_log_file)
Which HTTP routes the worker should handle (handlers)
How to detect model readiness and errors (log_action_config)
Constructs Worker(worker_config)
Calls Worker.run(), which:
Creates a backend object
Attaches handlers for each configured route
Starts an HTTP server using aiohttp
The serverless engine:
Watches:
Logs from your model (via model_log_file + LogActionConfig)
Benchmarks (via BenchmarkConfig)
Request workloads and success/error metrics
Uses this information to right-size your hot (running) and cold (stopped) capacity based on current and predicted workload.
What a PyWorker actually does
Conceptually, PyWorker’s responsibilities are:
Ingress proxy
Receive HTTP requests from the Vast serverless router on routes you define (e.g. /v1/completions, /generate).
Optionally transform and validate request bodies.
Workload tracking
For each request, compute a workload
Workload is a floating point number chosen by you:
For LLMs, this is typically “number of tokens” (prompt + max output).
For other workloads, it can be “constant 1 per request” or any cost metric that correlates with compute usage.
Forwarding to model server
Forward the transformed payload to your model server at model_server_url:model_server_port.
Handle FIFO queueing if your backend cannot process multiple requests in parallel.
Returning responses
Optionally transform or wrap model responses.
Support both standard JSON responses and streaming (SSE, NDJSON, chunked) responses.
Readiness, failure, and benchmarking
Watch your model’s log file:
Detect “model loaded” lines (on_load)
Detect “model error” lines (on_error)
After a load signal, run benchmarks on one of your routes.
Report effective throughput so the serverless engine can size capacity.
The worker.py structure
A PyWorker is usually a single file, worker.py, that:
Imports the public configuration types:
from vastai import (
    Worker,
    WorkerConfig,
    HandlerConfig,
    BenchmarkConfig,
    LogActionConfig,
)
Defines any helper functions (benchmark payload generators, request parsers, response generators, workload calculators).
Constructs a WorkerConfig and passes it to Worker.
Runs the worker:
Worker(worker_config).run()
That’s the entire required structure.
WorkerConfig: configuring the model backend
WorkerConfig tells the PyWorker how to talk to your model server and which routes to expose.
Typical usage:
from vastai import Worker, WorkerConfig, HandlerConfig, BenchmarkConfig, LogActionConfig

MODEL_SERVER_URL  = "http://127.0.0.1"
MODEL_SERVER_PORT = 18000
MODEL_LOG_FILE    = "/var/log/model/server.log"

worker_config = WorkerConfig(
    # --- Model config ---
    model_server_url=MODEL_SERVER_URL,
    model_server_port=MODEL_SERVER_PORT,
    model_log_file=MODEL_LOG_FILE,

    # --- Route handlers ---
    handlers=[
        # HandlerConfig(...) entries – see next section
    ],

    # --- Log actions ---
    log_action_config=LogActionConfig(
        on_load=[
            "Application startup complete.",
        ],
        on_error=[
            "RuntimeError: Engine",
            "Traceback (most recent call last):",
        ],
        on_info=[
            '"message":"Download',
        ],
    ),
)

Worker(worker_config).run()
Required fields
model_server_url: str Base URL where your model server is listening (e.g. "http://127.0.0.1").
model_server_port: int Port of the model server (e.g. 18000).
model_log_file: str Path to the model’s log file on disk. The PyWorker tails this file to:
Detect when the model has loaded (on_load)
Detect unrecoverable errors (on_error)
Report informative events (on_info)
handlers: list[HandlerConfig] One HandlerConfig per HTTP route your PyWorker should expose.
LogActionConfig: mapping log lines to state changes
LogActionConfig is where you teach PyWorker how to interpret log lines from your model server:
from vastai import LogActionConfig

log_action_config = LogActionConfig(
    on_load=[
        # Prefixes that indicate the model is fully loaded and ready
        "Application startup complete.",
    ],
    on_error=[
        # Prefixes that indicate irrecoverable failures
        "INFO exited: vllm",
        "RuntimeError: Engine",
        "Traceback (most recent call last):",
    ],
    on_info=[
        # Prefixes for useful “informational only” logs
        '"message":"Download',
    ],
)
Key semantics:
Matching is prefix-based and case-sensitive:
A log line is considered a match if it starts with one of your strings exactly.
on_load:
On the first match of any on_load prefix, the worker knows the model is “loaded” and can begin benchmarking.
on_error:
On the first match, the worker goes into an errored state.
The serverless engine will treat this as a failed worker and trigger a restart.
on_info:
Used for metrics and observability only; they do not change worker state.
Log file expectations:
The file at model_log_file should contain logs for the current run of the worker, not the entire machine lifetime.
The template should rotate logs per worker start so the PyWorker is not tailing stale history.
HandlerConfig: configuring routes and per-endpoint behavior
Each HandlerConfig describes how a single HTTP route behaves:
Which path it handles (e.g. /v1/completions)
Whether requests are processed in parallel or serialized
How to compute workload from a request
How to generate benchmark payloads for this route
Optional hooks for parsing requests and generating responses
Optional legacy integration with existing EndpointHandler/ApiPayload classes
A minimal handler:
from vastai import HandlerConfig

completions_handler = HandlerConfig(
    route="/v1/completions",
    allow_parallel_requests=True,
    max_queue_time=60.0,
    workload_calculator=lambda payload: float(payload.get("max_tokens", 0)),
    benchmark_config=BenchmarkConfig(
        generator=completions_benchmark_generator,
        runs=16,
        concurrency=100,
    ),
)
Route and basic queueing
route: str Path to expose on the PyWorker HTTP server. For example:
/v1/completions
/v1/chat/completions
/generate
allow_parallel_requests: bool Controls whether the PyWorker performs internal queueing:
False (default):
PyWorker enforces strict FIFO queueing to the model server.
At most one in-flight request is sent to the model backend at a time for this handler.
This is appropriate when the model server itself is single-threaded or cannot handle parallel requests.
True:
PyWorker forwards requests directly and lets the model backend or serverless engine handle parallelism.
Use this for backends that support parallel processing (e.g. vLLM).
max_queue_time: float | None Maximum time (in seconds) a request is allowed to remain queued inside the PyWorker before being processed.
If a queued request waits longer than max_queue_time:
PyWorker responds to the client with HTTP 429 (Too Many Requests).
The error is recorded in metrics and logs.
The client SDK will automatically retry your request later.
Workload calculation
workload_calculator: Callable[[dict], float] | None
Defines how much workload (a float) this request represents. This is the key input to autoscaling.
Input:
A dict representing the model payload (the same dict forwarded to your model server).
Output:
A float representing workload; larger means “more expensive.”
Recommendation:
For applications where requests do not vary much in complexity, returning a constant value (i.e. 100) is often sufficient.
For applications that have significant variation in work complexity from request to request, it is best to use a workload calculation that reflects the variability. For image generation, that could be the number of pixels generated (h x w). For video, that could be the number of frames generated x the size of the frame.
Examples:
# LLM: approximate cost as max_tokens only
workload_calculator=lambda payload: float(payload.get("max_tokens", 0))

# LLM: prompt tokens + expected output tokens
def llm_workload(payload: dict) -> float:
    prompt = payload.get("prompt", "")
    max_tokens = payload.get("max_tokens", 0)
    # Very simple proxy: character-based length
    prompt_tokens = len(prompt) / 4.0
    return prompt_tokens + max_tokens

# Constant cost per request
workload_calculator=lambda payload: 100.0
Behavior on errors:
If workload_calculator raises an exception:
The request fails.
PyWorker logs the error and returns HTTP 500 to the client.
Request parsing: request_parser
request_parser: Callable[[dict], dict] | None
Optional hook to transform the incoming JSON request into the payload that will be forwarded to the model backend.
Key points:
Input:
The raw JSON body received by PyWorker (already parsed into a dict).
Output:
A dict representing the model payload.
PyWorker will then use this dict as the internal payload and forward it to your model server as JSON.
Intended usage patterns:
Simple pass-through (no parser):
If you do not provide request_parser, PyWorker forwards the incoming JSON as-is to the model backend.
The same dict is used for workload calculations.
Shape transformation:
Translate “public API” shape into “backend API” shape:
def my_request_parser(json_msg: dict) -> dict:
    # Client sends: {"prompt": "...", "max_tokens": 128}
    # Backend expects: {"input_text": "...", "limit": 128}
    return {
        "input_text": json_msg["prompt"],
        "limit": json_msg.get("max_tokens", 0),
    }
Validation and light on-request hooks:
Validate fields and, if needed, mutate the dict in place:
def guarded_parser(json_msg: dict) -> dict:
    if "prompt" not in json_msg:
        raise ValueError("prompt is required")
    json_msg.setdefault("max_tokens", 256)
    return json_msg
Behavior on errors:
Any exception raised in request_parser:
Is logged for the instance.
Marks the request as errored.
The client receives HTTP 500.
Response handling: response_generator
response_generator: Callable[[web.Request, ClientResponse], Awaitable[web.StreamResponse | web.Response]] | None
Optional hook to transform the model server response into the final client response.
Input:
client_request: the original aiohttp.web.Request from the client.
model_response: the aiohttp.ClientResponse from the model server.
Output:
An aiohttp.web.Response or aiohttp.web.StreamResponse.
Example: simple JSON pass-through with custom header:
from aiohttp import web, ClientResponse
from typing import Union

async def custom_response_generator(
    client_request: web.Request,
    model_response: ClientResponse,
) -> Union[web.Response, web.StreamResponse]:
    data = await model_response.read()
    return web.Response(
        body=data,
        status=model_response.status,
        content_type=model_response.content_type,
        headers={"X-Worker": "my-custom-pyworker"},
    )
Behavior:
If you define response_generator, PyWorker calls it and uses the result directly.
If your response_generator raises an exception:
PyWorker logs the error.
The client receives HTTP 500.
Default response behavior (no response_generator)
If you do not specify a response_generator, PyWorker provides a reasonable default:
It detects streaming responses based on:
Content-Type starting with text/event-stream
Content-Type equal to application/x-ndjson or application/jsonl
Content-Type containing "stream" (case-insensitive)
Transfer-Encoding: chunked
If the response is streaming:
PyWorker creates a web.StreamResponse.
Copies the appropriate content_type.
Streams chunks from the model server to the client as they arrive.
If the response is not streaming:
PyWorker reads the full body from model_response.
Returns a web.Response with:
The same status code.
The same Content-Type.
All headers except Content-Type (which is set directly).
In both paths, PyWorker logs successes and errors and updates internal metrics.
BenchmarkConfig: measuring performance
Benchmarks run once the worker detects a model load signal via on_load. They are central to how the serverless engine learns the capacity of each worker.
A BenchmarkConfig is attached to exactly one handler:
from vastai import BenchmarkConfig

benchmark_config = BenchmarkConfig(
    # Choose exactly one of dataset OR generator
    dataset=[
        {"model": "my-llm", "prompt": "hello world", "max_tokens": 128},
        {"model": "my-llm", "prompt": "another prompt", "max_tokens": 256},
    ],
    # OR
    # generator=completions_benchmark_generator,

    runs=16,
    concurrency=100,
)
Attach it to a handler:
HandlerConfig(
    route="/v1/completions",
    allow_parallel_requests=True,
    workload_calculator=lambda payload: payload.get("max_tokens", 0),
    benchmark_config=benchmark_config,
)
Key semantics:
You must configure exactly one HandlerConfig with a BenchmarkConfig.
PyWorker enforces that only one handler can be the benchmark handler.
Benchmarks start:
PyWorker sees an on_load log line from your model.
It then runs the benchmark on the handler with BenchmarkConfig.
The worker becomes ready only after the benchmark finishes successfully.
If benchmark runs fail (e.g. errors, timeouts), the worker is treated as errored and will be restarted by the serverless engine.
Benchmark payloads
You can provide benchmark payloads via:
dataset: list[dict]
A literal list of payloads. PyWorker selects entries (e.g. at random) to send to the model server.
generator: Callable[[], dict]
A function that returns one payload dict each time it is called.
For clarity and maintainability:
Pick one of dataset or generator (do not rely on precedence between them).
Make benchmark payloads representative of your “typical” requests:
If most traffic is small, do not benchmark only with huge prompts.
If traffic is mixed, choose a representative distribution.
Runs and concurrency
runs: int Number of benchmark rounds.
concurrency: int Number of concurrent requests per run if allow_parallel_requests=True.
If allow_parallel_requests=False:
Effective concurrency is clamped; your backend will process benchmark requests serially despite a larger concurrency value.
The serverless engine uses the observed throughput (workload completed per unit time) to estimate capacity. Your chosen workload function and these benchmark settings directly influence how it sizes hot and cold capacity.
Autoscaling and workload (conceptual overview)
PyWorker does not expose the full autoscaling algorithm, but conceptually:
Each request is assigned a workload (a float) by your workload_calculator.
Benchmarks estimate how many units of workload per second a worker can handle on a given handler.
At runtime, the serverless engine:
Tracks workload being requested by clients.
Tracks workload being processed by each worker.
Adjusts:
Hot capacity (running workers ready to serve)
Cold capacity (stopped workers that can be started quickly)
To “right size” capacity to match current and predicted workload.
For LLMs, we recommend:
Workload ≈ prompt tokens + expected output tokens (or just max_tokens as a simpler proxy).
For other workloads, a common approach is:
Set a constant workload per request (e.g. 100.0) so effective capacity is “requests per second”.
Example: vLLM-style worker.py
Below is a complete worker.py for a vLLM-style model server that exposes:
/v1/completions
/v1/chat/completions
Both endpoints:
Treat max_tokens as the workload metric.
Allow parallel requests.
Use a benchmark generator that builds random prompts.
import os
import random

import nltk

from vastai import (
    Worker,
    WorkerConfig,
    HandlerConfig,
    LogActionConfig,
    BenchmarkConfig,
)

# --- Model configuration ------------------------------------------------------

MODEL_SERVER_URL  = "http://127.0.0.1"
MODEL_SERVER_PORT = 18000
MODEL_LOG_FILE    = "/var/log/portal/vllm.log"

# vLLM-specific log messages
MODEL_LOAD_LOG_MSG = [
    "Application startup complete.",
]

MODEL_ERROR_LOG_MSGS = [
    "INFO exited: vllm",
    "RuntimeError: Engine",
    "Traceback (most recent call last):",
]

MODEL_INFO_LOG_MSGS = [
    '"message":"Download',
]

# --- Benchmark data generation -----------------------------------------------

# For this example we use NLTK's word list to create random prompts
nltk.download("words")
WORD_LIST = nltk.corpus.words.words()

def completions_benchmark_generator() -> dict:
    """Generate one benchmark payload for the /v1/completions endpoint.
    This shape should match what your vLLM server expects.
    """
    prompt = " ".join(random.choices(WORD_LIST, k=int(250)))

    model = os.environ.get("MODEL_NAME")
    if not model:
        raise ValueError("MODEL_NAME environment variable not set")

    return {
        "model": model,
        "prompt": prompt,
        "temperature": 0.7,
        "max_tokens": 500,
    }

# --- Worker configuration -----------------------------------------------------

worker_config = WorkerConfig(
    model_server_url=MODEL_SERVER_URL,
    model_server_port=MODEL_SERVER_PORT,
    model_log_file=MODEL_LOG_FILE,

    handlers=[
        # /v1/completions: also used as the benchmark handler
        HandlerConfig(
            route="/v1/completions",

            # Allow vLLM to schedule parallel requests internally
            allow_parallel_requests=True,

            # Maximum time a request may sit in any internal queue before being rejected
            max_queue_time=60.0,

            # Workload: use max_tokens as a simple cost proxy
            workload_calculator=lambda payload: float(payload.get("max_tokens", 0)),

            benchmark_config=BenchmarkConfig(
                # Use our generator to produce payloads
                generator=completions_benchmark_generator,
                runs=8,
                concurrency=10,
            ),
        ),

        # /v1/chat/completions: similar behavior but no benchmark_config
        HandlerConfig(
            route="/v1/chat/completions",
            allow_parallel_requests=True,
            max_queue_time=60.0,
            workload_calculator=lambda payload: float(payload.get("max_tokens", 0)),
        ),
    ],

    log_action_config=LogActionConfig(
        on_load=MODEL_LOAD_LOG_MSG,
        on_error=MODEL_ERROR_LOG_MSGS,
        on_info=MODEL_INFO_LOG_MSGS,
    ),
)

# Run the worker synchronously
Worker(worker_config).run()

# Or run asynchronously if you need to do other Python work:
# import asyncio
# asyncio.run(Worker(worker_config).run_async())
How requests and responses behave end-to-end
Putting the pieces together, a typical request/response flow looks like this:
Client calls your Serverless Endpoint on one of your routes, e.g. POST /v1/completions with JSON body:
 {
     "model": "Qwen/Qwen3-8B",
     "prompt" : "What is 2 + 2?",
     "max_tokens" : 128,
     "temperature" : 0.7
 }
The Serverless router forwards this to the appropriate PyWorker instance’s /v1/completions route.
The HandlerConfig for /v1/completions:
Optionally runs request_parser (if configured) to transform the request.
Runs workload_calculator to compute workload.
Either:
Queues the request (FIFO) if allow_parallel_requests=False, or
Forwards it immediately to the model backend if True.
PyWorker sends the request payload (as JSON) to your model server at model_server_url:model_server_port.
When the model responds:
If you defined response_generator, PyWorker calls it and returns its result.
Otherwise, PyWorker:
Detects whether the response is streaming or not.
Either pipes the stream to the client or returns a standard JSON response.
Any exceptions in parsing, forwarding, or response handling:
Are logged in the worker’s logs.
Produce an HTTP 500 response to the client.
Legacy support: existing EndpointHandler / ApiPayload implementations
If you have existing PyWorkers implemented using the older pattern (server.py, data_types.py, EndpointHandler, ApiPayload), you can still run them under the new Worker abstraction by using two escape hatches in HandlerConfig:
handler_class: Type[EndpointHandler]
payload_class: Type[ApiPayload]
Example:
from vastai import Worker, WorkerConfig, HandlerConfig, LogActionConfig
from my_legacy_worker.server import GenerateHandler  # Your existing EndpointHandler

worker_config = WorkerConfig(
    model_server_url="http://127.0.0.1",
    model_server_port=5001,
    model_log_file="/var/log/legacy_model.log",
    handlers=[
        HandlerConfig(
            route="/generate",
            handler_class=GenerateHandler,  # Use your existing handler directly
        ),
    ],
    log_action_config=LogActionConfig(
        on_load=["infer server has started"],
        on_error=["Exception: corrupted model file"],
        on_info=['"message":"Download'],
    ),
)

Worker(worker_config).run()
Important notes:
When handler_class is provided:
PyWorker instantiates your EndpointHandler directly.
The factory does not apply other HandlerConfig fields to it.
Queueing, workload calculation, and payload handling are all controlled by your legacy class.
This mechanism exists primarily for backward compatibility:
It lets you keep old workers running while Vast evolves the SDK.
For new projects, we strongly recommend using the modern WorkerConfig + HandlerConfig + BenchmarkConfig + LogActionConfig approach rather than implementing EndpointHandler and ApiPayload directly.
This keeps the maintenance burden on the Vast SDK rather than on your own internal abstraction layer.
Linking worker.py to your Serverless Endpoint
Finally, to make Vast actually use your worker.py:
Put worker.py and requirements.txt at the root of a public Git repository.
In your Serverless template configuration:
Set the environment variable PYWORKER_REPO to that Git repo URL.
The start-server script on each worker will:
Clone PYWORKER_REPO.
Install requirements.txt.
Start your model server.
Run python worker.py.
Once deployed:
Your worker instances will:
Tail the model log file.
Wait for on_load logs.
Run benchmarks on the configured benchmark handler.
Join the ready pool once benchmarking completes successfully.
At that point, your Serverless Endpoint is fully backed by your custom worker.py implementation.</content>
Monitoring and Debug:
Worker States:
<content>Worker states represent the current operational status of your serverless worker instances. Understanding these states helps you monitor your workers’ health and manage your costs effectively.
Worker States in the Vast UI
The following table describes all available worker states that are shown to users in the UI:
State Name Description Billing State
Ready Worker is fully initialized with model loaded and ready to process tasks Ready
Loading Worker is loading resources or configurations Loading
Inactive Worker is created but stopped, not currently processing Inactive
Destroying Worker is being destroyed and resources are being released Not billed
Error Worker has encountered an error and requires attention Not billed
Rebooting Worker is restarting to apply updates or recover from issues Billed by previous state
Creating Worker is being created and initialized Creating
Starting Worker is in the process of transitioning to Ready state Ready
Stopping Worker is in the process of transitioning to Inactive state Inactive
Updating Worker is in the process of being updated and rebooted Ready
For more information on the specific breakdown of charges, please refer to Serverless pricing
Worker States in the Vast CLI and logs
The worker logs, accessible through the Vast CLI and UI, have more detailed descriptions of worker states to aid in debugging issues. These are described in the table below:
State Name Description Billing State
Ready (IDLE) Worker is fully initialized with model loaded and ready to process tasks Ready
Loading (LOADING) Worker is performing docker pull/run operations Loading
Model Loading (MODEL_LOADING) Worker is loading the model for the first time in its lifetime Loading
Inactive (STOPPED) Worker is created but stopped, not currently processing Inactive
Destroying (DESTROYING) Worker is being destroyed and resources are being released Not Billed
Error (ERROR) Worker has encountered an error (version mismatch, error message, etc.) Not Billed
Rebooting (REBOOTING) Worker is restarting to apply updates or recover from issues Billed by previous state
Creating (CREATING) Worker instance creation API call has succeeded Creating
Created (CREATED) Worker is created but stopped in database Creating
Starting (STARTING) Worker is starting up after initial boot (not first time) Ready
Stopping (STOPPING) Worker is in the process of transitioning to stopped state Inactive
Pending (PENDING) Rental offer has been accepted, worker setup is pending Not Billed
Update Ready (UPDATE_READY) Worker is prepared and ready for update reboot Ready
Update Rebooting (UPDATE_REBOOTING) Worker is rebooting after update (non-alive) Ready
Update Starting (UPDATE_STARTING) Worker is starting up after update reboot Ready</content>
Zero Downtime Worker Update:
<content>When you need to change the model or template behind a live Serverless endpoint, Vast can perform a rolling update that transitions every worker to the new configuration without dropping in-flight requests. From your users’ perspective there is no downtime — existing requests complete normally, and new requests are routed to updated workers as they become available.
When to Use This
A zero downtime update is useful any time you need to change the backend of a live endpoint, for example:
Upgrading to a newer version of your template.
Switching to a different model (e.g., moving from Qwen/Qwen3-8B to Qwen/Qwen3-14B).
Adjusting vLLM launch arguments or other environment variables in the template.
Adding or changing the search filter on your worker group.
How to Trigger an Update
The process requires two steps:
1. Update your template
Modify the template that your endpoint uses. This could involve changing the MODEL_NAME, updating VLLM_ARGS, or selecting an entirely new template version.
2. Update the worker group configuration
Once the template is saved, update your worker group to reference the new template. This signals Vast to begin the rolling update.
After you complete these two steps, Vast handles the rest automatically. No additional action is required on your part.
What Happens During the Update
Vast orchestrates the transition across your worker group in the following sequence:
Inactive workers become active and update — Any inactive workers are brought into an active state, updated to the new template and model configuration, and made available for requests.
Active workers finish existing tasks first — Workers that are currently active and handling requests are allowed to complete all of their in-flight tasks before updating. Once an active worker finishes its current work, it updates to the new configuration and rejoins the pool.
New requests route to updated workers — As updated workers come online, incoming requests are directed to them. This continues until every worker in the group is running the new configuration.
Because active workers are never interrupted mid-request, no responses are dropped or truncated during the rollout.
Best Practices
Schedule updates during low-traffic periods — While the update process is designed to be seamless, performing it during a period of stable, low traffic reduces the number of in-flight requests that need to drain and shortens the overall transition window.
Verify the new template independently — Before triggering a rolling update on a production endpoint, consider testing the new template on a separate endpoint to confirm that the model loads correctly and produces the expected output.
Monitor during the rollout — Keep an eye on your endpoint’s request latency and error rate while the update is in progress. A brief increase in latency is normal as the worker pool transitions, but errors may indicate a problem with the new configuration.</content>
Endpoint and Worker Logs:
<content>Endpoint and worker logs provide real-time visibility into the behavior of your serverless infrastructure. These logs are primarily intended for debugging issues with endpoints, workergroups, and individual workers.
Endpoint Logs
Endpoint logs are available under the “All Workergroups” tab in the Serverless endpoint, within the Vast console UI.
Endpoint Log
These logs include low-level details about scaling decisions made by the serverless engine. They are useful for understanding how the system responds to traffic and workload changes, and include:
Summarized performance for all workers and workergroups
Measured and estimated performance and worker load
Marketplace offer details used in worker recruitment
Worker Logs
Worker logs are accessible on a per-worker basis. To view worker logs, navigate to the serverless endpoint in question and click on this icon next to the worker.
Worker Log
Worker logs provide detailed runtime output for individual workers, helping you debug model loading, request handling, container behavior, and other worker-specific events.
Log Characteristics and Retention
Logs are streaming outputs, typically only a few seconds behind real-time.
Logs are not permanently maintained and are intended for near real-time debugging of issues.
Users who need longer retention should periodically download logs to store them externally.
Accessing Logs Through the CLI
In addition to accessing these logs through the UI, you can use the vastai CLI to check endpoint and worker group logs at different log levels (level 0 is the highest detail, level 3 the lowest).
Endpoint logs
CLI Command
vastai get endpt-logs <endpoint_id> --level (0-3)
Workergroup logs
CLI Command
vastai get wrkgrp-logs <worker_group_id> --level (0-3)</content>
Pricing:
<content>Unlike other providers, Vast Serverless offers pay-per-second pricing for all workloads at the same price as Vast.ai’s non-Serverless GPU instances.
As a Serverless endpoint takes requests, it will automatically scale its number of workers up or down depending on the incoming and forecasted demand. When scaling up, the engine recruits from the Vast.ai GPU marketplace to find the best price-performance worker available. Once identified, its cost is added to the running sum of all GPU instances running on your Serverless instance. As demand reduces, the engine will remove the GPU with the worst price-performance first.
Billing for Workers
The following table breaks down the specific charges based on worker state:
State Description GPU compute Storage Bandwidth (in/out)
Ready An active worker Billed Billed Billed
Loading Model is loading Billed Billed Billed
Creating Worker recruiting Not billed Billed Billed
Inactive A cold worker Not billed Billed Billed
Billing for Endpoints
The following table breaks down the specific charges based on endpoint state:
State Description Billing Description
Active - Engine is actively managing worker recruitment and release
- Workers are active All workers billed at their relevant states
Suspended - Engine is NOT managing worker recruitment and release
- Workers are active. Workers are billed based on their state at time of suspension.
Any workers that are currently being created or are loading, will complete to a ready state (and be billed as such).
Stopped - Engine is NOT managing worker recruitment and release
- Workers are all inactive All workers are changed to and are billed in the inactive state
Destroyed - Engine is NOT managing worker recruitment and released
- All workers are destroyed All billing stops</content>
Pre-built Templates:
vLLM:
<content>The vLLM Serverless template can be used to infer LLMs on Vast GPU instances. This page documents required environment variables and endpoints to get started.
A full PyWorker and Client implementation can be found here, which implements the endpoints below.
Environment Variables
HF_TOKEN(string): HuggingFace API token with read permissions, used to download gated models. Read more about HuggingFace tokens here. This token should be added to your Vast user account’s environment variables. The Getting Started guide shows this in step 1.
MODEL_NAME(string): Name of the model to be used for inference. Supported HuggingFace models are shown here.
VLLM_ARGS(string): vLLM specific arguments that are already pre-set in the template.
Some models on HuggingFace require the user to accept the terms and conditions on their HuggingFace account before using. For such models, this must be done first before using it with a Vast template.
Endpoints
/v1/completions/ 
This endpoint generates a text completion that attempts to match any context or pattern provided in a given prompt. Provide a text prompt, and the model returns the predicted continuation. This endpoint is best suited for single-turn tasks, whereas the /v1/chat/completions endpoint is optimized for multi-turn conversational scenarios.
Quickstart
Here’s a simple script using the vastai-sdk pip package to get up and running fast with vLLM:
import asyncio
from vastai import Serverless

MAX_TOKENS = 128

async def main():
    async with Serverless() as client:
        endpoint = await client.get_endpoint(name="my-endpoint")

        payload = {
            "input" : {
                "model": "Qwen/Qwen3-8B",
                "prompt" : "Who are you?",
                "max_tokens" : MAX_TOKENS,
                "temperature" : 0.7
            }
        }
        
        response = await endpoint.request("/v1/completions", payload, cost=MAX_TOKENS)
        print(response["response"]["choices"][0]["text"])

if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())
Inputs
payload:
input:
model(string): The specific identifier of the model to be used for generating the text completion.
prompt(optional, string): The input text that the model will use as a starting point to generate a response. Default is “Hello”.
max_tokens(optional, int): The maximum number of tokens the model will generate for the response to the input. Default is 256.
temperature(optional, float): A value between 0 and 2 that controls the randomness of the output. Higher values result in more creative and less predictable responses, while lower values make the output more deterministic. Default is 0.7.
top_k(optional, int): An integer that restricts the model to sampling from the k most likely tokens at each step of the generation process. Default is 20.
top_p(optional, float): A float between 0 and 1 that controls nucleus sampling. The model considers only the most probable tokens whose cumulative probability exceeds p. Default is 0.4.
stream(optional, bool): A boolean flag that determines the response format. If true, the server will send back a stream of token-by-token events as they are generated. If false, it will send the full completion in a single response after it’s finished. Default is false.
JSON
{
  "prompt": "The capital of the United States is",
  "model": "Qwen/Qwen3-8B",
  "max_tokens": 256,
  "temperature": 0.7,
  "top_k": 20,
  "top_p": 0.4,
  "stream": false
}
Depending on the model being used, other parameters like ‘temperature’ or ‘top_p’ may be supported. Passing in these values in parameters will forward the values to the model, but they are not required. All parameters can be found in the CompletionConfig class in client.py.
Outputs
id(string): A unique identifier for the completion request.
object(string): The type of object returned. For completions, this is always text_completion.
created(int): The Unix timestamp (in seconds) of when the completion was created.
model(string): The name of the model that generated the response.
choices:
index(int): The index of the choice in the list (e.g., 0 for the first choice).
text(string): The generated text for this completion choice.
logprobs(object): This field is null unless you requested log probabilities. If requested, it contains the log probabilities of the generated tokens.
finish_reason(string): The reason the model stopped generating text. Common values include length (reached max_tokens), stop (encountered a stop sequence), or tool_calls.
stop_reason(string): Provides a more specific reason for why the model stopped, often related to internal model logic. It can be null if not applicable.
prompt_logprobs(object): Similar to logprobs, but for the tokens in the initial prompt. It is null unless specifically requested.
usage:
prompt_tokens(int): The number of tokens in the input prompt.
total_tokens(int): The total number of tokens used in the request (prompt + completion).
completion_tokens(int): The number of tokens in the generated completion.
prompt_tokens_details(object): Provides a more detailed breakdown of prompt tokens. It is null unless requested.
kv_transfer_params(object): An extension field (outside the official OpenAI spec) that carries all the metadata you need to reuse or move around the model’s key/value (KV) cache instead of recomputing it on every call.
JSON
{
  "id": "cmpl-7bd54bc0b3f4d48abf3fe4fa3c11f8b",
  "object": "text_completion",
  "created": 1754334436,
  "model": "Qwen/Qwen3-8B",
  "choices": [
    {
      "index": 0,
      "text": " Washington D.C...",
      "logprobs": null,
      "finish_reason": "length",
      "stop_reason": null,
      "prompt_logprobs": null
    }
  ],
  "usage": {
    "prompt_tokens": 6,
    "total_tokens": 262,
    "completion_tokens": 256,
    "prompt_tokens_details": null
  },
  "kv_transfer_params": null
}
Streaming
To use streaming, set the stream flag to true in the request payload.
import asyncio
from vastai import Serverless

MAX_TOKENS = 1024

async def main():
    async with Serverless() as client:
        endpoint = await client.get_endpoint(name="my-vllm-endpoint")

        system_prompt = (
            "You are Qwen, a helpful AI assistant.\n"
            "You are to only speak in English.\n"
            "Please answer the users response.\n"
            "When you are done, use the <stop> token.\n"
        )


        user_prompt = """
        What is the 118th element in the periodic table?
        """

        payload = {
            "input" : {
                "model": "Qwen/Qwen3-8B",
                "prompt" : f"{system_prompt}\n{user_prompt}\n",
                "max_tokens" : MAX_TOKENS,
                "temperature" : 0.8,
                "stop" : ["<stop>"],
                "stream" : True,
            }
        }

        response = await endpoint.request("/v1/completions", payload, cost=MAX_TOKENS, stream=True)
        stream = response["response"]
        async for event in stream:
            print(event["choices"][0]["text"], end="", flush=True)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())
/v1/chat/completions/ 
This endpoint generates a model response for a given conversational history. Unlike the /v1/completions/ endpoint, which is designed to continue a single text prompt, the chat endpoint excels at multi-turn dialogues. By providing a sequence of messages, each with a designated role (system, user, or assistant), you can simulate a conversation, and the model will generate the next appropriate message from the assistant.
Not all LLMs will work with this endpoint. The model must be fine-tuned to understand messages and tools. The default model used in the Vast template will work.
Inputs
payload:
input:
model(string): The specific identifier of the model to be used for generating the text completion.
messages(array): A list of message objects that form the conversation history.
role(string): The role of the message author. Can be system, user, or assistant.
content(string): The content of the message.
max_tokens(optional, int): The maximum number of tokens the model will generate for the response to the input. Default is 256.
temperature(optional, float): A value between 0 and 2 that controls the randomness of the output. Higher values result in more creative and less predictable responses, while lower values make the output more deterministic. Default is 0.7.
top_k(optional, int): An integer that restricts the model to sampling from the k most likely tokens at each step of the generation process. Default is 20.
top_p(optional, float): A float between 0 and 1 that controls nucleus sampling. The model considers only the most probable tokens whose cumulative probability exceeds p. Default is 0.4.
stream(optional, bool): A boolean flag that determines the response format. If true, the server will send back a stream of token-by-token events as they are generated. If false, it will send the full completion in a single response after it’s finished. Default is false.
tools(optional, List[Dict[str, Any]]): A list of function definitions that the model can call to perform external actions. When a relevant tool is detected in the user’s prompt, the model can generate a JSON object with the function name and arguments to call. Your code can then execute this function and return the output to the model to continue the conversation.
tool_choice(optional, string): This parameter controls how the model uses the functions provided in the tools list. It can be set to “none” to prevent the model from using any tools, “auto” to let the model decide when to call a function, or you can force the model to call a specific function by providing an object like {“type”: “function”, “function”: {“name”: “my_function_name”}}.
The max_tokens parameter, rather than the messages size, impacts performance. For example, if an instance is benchmarked to process 100 tokens per second, a request with max_tokens = 200 will take approximately 2 seconds to complete.
JSON
{
  "auth_data": {
    "signature": "a_base64_encoded_signature_string_from_route_endpoint",
    "cost": 2096,
    "endpoint": "Your-OpenAI-Endpoint-Name",
    "reqnum": 1234567893,
    "url": "http://worker-ip-address:port"
  },
  "payload": {
    "model": "Qwen/Qwen3-8B",
    "messages": [
      {
        "role": "user",
        "content": "What's the weather like in LA today?"
      }
    ],
    "max_tokens": 256,
    "temperature": 0.7,
    "top_k": 40,
    "top_p": 0.9,
    "stream": false,
    "tools": [
      {
        "type": "function",
        "function": {
          "name": "get_current_weather",
          "description": "Get the current weather in a given location",
          "parameters": {
            "type": "object",
            "properties": {
              "location": {
                "type": "string",
                "description": "The city and state, e.g. Los Angeles, CA"
              },
              "unit": {
                "type": "string",
                "enum": ["celsius", "fahrenheit"],
                "description": "The unit of temperature"
              }
            },
            "required": ["location"]
          }
        }
      }
    ],
    "tool_choice": {
      "type": "function",
      "function": {
        "name": "get_current_weather"
      }
    }
  }
}
Outputs
id(string): A unique identifier for the completion request.
object(string): The type of object returned. For chat completions, this is always chat.completion.
created(int): The Unix timestamp (in seconds) of when the completion was created.
model(string): The name of the model that generated the response.
choices:
index(int): The index of the choice in the list (e.g., 0 for the first choice).
messages(string): A message object generated by the model.
role(string): The role of the message author. Can be system, user, or assistant.
content(string): The content of the message.
tool_calls(array): Contains the function call(s) the model wants to execute. The arguments field is a JSON string containing the parameters extracted from the user’s prompt.
finish_reason(string): The reason the model stopped generating text. Common values include length (reached max_tokens), stop (encountered a stop sequence), or tool_calls.
usage:
prompt_tokens(int): The number of tokens in the input prompt.
total_tokens(int): The total number of tokens used in the request (prompt + completion).
completion_tokens(int): The number of tokens in the generated completion.
JSON
{
  "id": "chatcmpl-a1b2c3d4-e5f6-7890-1234-5g6h7j8k9l0m",
  "object": "chat.completion",
  "created": 1754336000,
  "model": "Qwen/Qwen3-8B",
  "choices": [
    {
      "index": 0,
      "message": {
        "role": "assistant",
        "content": null,
        "tool_calls": [
          {
            "id": "call_Abc123Xyz",
            "type": "function",
            "function": {
              "name": "get_current_weather",
              "arguments": "{\"location\": \"Los Angeles, CA\"}"
            }
          }
        ]
      },
      "finish_reason": "tool_calls"
    }
  ],
  "usage": {
    "prompt_tokens": 85,
    "completion_tokens": 18,
    "total_tokens": 103
  }
}
Streaming
To use streaming, set the stream flag to true in the request payload
import asyncio
from vastai import Serverless

MAX_TOKENS = 1024

async def main():
    async with Serverless() as client:
        endpoint = await client.get_endpoint(name="my-vllm-endpoint")

        system_prompt = (
            "You are Qwen.\n"
            "You are to only speak in English.\n"
        )

        user_prompt = "What is the integral of 2x^2 from 0 to 5?"

        messages = [
            {"role": "system", "content": system_prompt},
            {"role": "user", "content": user_prompt},
        ]

        payload = {
              "model": "Qwen/Qwen3-8B",
              "messages": messages,
              "stream": True,
              "max_tokens": MAX_TOKENS,
              "temperature": 0.7,
        }

        response = await endpoint.request("/v1/chat/completions", payload, cost=MAX_TOKENS, stream=True)
        stream = response["response"]

        printed_reasoning = False
        printed_answer = False

        async for chunk in stream:
            delta = chunk["choices"][0].get("delta", {})

            rc = delta.get("reasoning_content", None)
            if rc:
                if not printed_reasoning:
                    printed_reasoning = True
                    print("Reasoning:\n", end="", flush=True)
                print(rc, end="", flush=True)

            content = delta.get("content", None)
            if content:
                if not printed_answer:
                    printed_answer = True
                    if printed_reasoning:
                        print("\n\nAnswer:\n", end="", flush=True)
                    else:
                        print("Answer:\n", end="", flush=True)
                print(content, end="", flush=True)


if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())</content>
Text Generation Inference (TGI):
<content>The Text Generation Inference serverless template can be used to infer LLMs on Vast GPU instances. This page documents required environment variables and endpoints to get started.
A full PyWorker and Client implementation can be found here.
Environment Variables
HF_TOKEN(string): HuggingFace API token with read permissions, used to download gated models. Read more about HuggingFace tokens here.
MODEL_ID(string): ID of the model to be used for inference. Supported HuggingFace models are shown here.
Some models on HuggingFace require the user to accept the terms and conditions on their HuggingFace account before using. For such models, this must be done first before using it with a Vast template.
Install the Vast.ai SDK
Ensure you have the vastai-sdk pip packaged installed
pip install vastai-sdk
Ensure API key is set
Configure the environment variable VAST_API_KEY to contain your Vast.ai Serverless API key
export VAST_API_KEY=<your-api-key>
Using /generate/
Python
import asyncio
from vastai import Serverless

MAX_TOKENS = 128

async def main():
    async with Serverless() as client:
        endpoint = await client.get_endpoint(name="my-tgi-endpoint")

        prompt = "Who are you?"

        payload = {
            "inputs": prompt,
            "parameters": {
                "max_new_tokens": MAX_TOKENS,
                "temperature": 0.7,
                "return_full_text": False
            }
        }

        resp = await endpoint.request("/generate", payload, cost=MAX_TOKENS)

        print(resp["response"]["generated_text"])

if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())
Using /generate_stream/
Python
import asyncio
from vastai import Serverless

MAX_TOKENS = 1024

def build_prompt(system_prompt: str, user_prompt: str) -> str:
    return (
        f"<<SYS>>\n{system_prompt.strip()}\n<</SYS>>\n\n"
        f"User: {user_prompt.strip()}\n"
        f"Assistant:"
    )

async def main():
    async with Serverless() as client:
        endpoint = await client.get_endpoint(name="my-tgi-endpoint")

        system_prompt = (
            "You are Qwen.\n"
            "You are to only speak in English.\n"
        )
        user_prompt = """
        Critically analyze the extent to which hotdogs are sandwiches.
        """

        prompt = build_prompt(system_prompt, user_prompt)

        payload = {
            "inputs": prompt,
            "parameters": {
                "max_new_tokens": MAX_TOKENS,
                "temperature": 0.7,
                "do_sample": True,
                "return_full_text": False,
            }
        }

        resp = await endpoint.request(
            "/generate_stream",
            payload,
            cost=MAX_TOKENS,
            stream=True,
        )
        stream = resp["response"]

        printed_answer = False
        async for event in stream:
            tok = (event.get("token") or {}).get("text")
            if tok:
                if not printed_answer:
                    printed_answer = True
                    print("Answer:\n", end="", flush=True)
                print(tok, end="", flush=True)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())</content>
Comfy UI:
<content>The ComfyUI Serverless template allows you to send requests to ComfyUI and have generated assets automatically uploaded to S3-compatible storage. The template returns pre-signed URLs in response to requests, along with detailed process updates emitted by ComfyUI during generation.
Template Components
The ComfyUI template includes:
In the Docker Image:
ComfyUI
ComfyUI API Wrapper
Stable Diffusion 1.5 (for benchmarking)
Downloaded on first boot:
PyWorker (comfyui-json worker)
Provisioning Script for custom configuration
Adds cron job to remove older output files (older than 24 hours) if available disk space is less than 512MB
Before using this template, familiarize yourself with the Serverless Documentation and Getting Started With Serverless guide.
Environment Variables
Required for S3 Storage
The API wrapper manages asset uploads to S3-compatible storage. Configure these variables in your Account Settings:
S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID(string): Access key ID for S3-compatible storage
S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY(string): Secret access key for S3-compatible storage
S3_BUCKET_NAME(string): Bucket name for S3-compatible storage
S3_ENDPOINT_URL(string): Endpoint URL for S3-compatible storage
S3_REGION(string): Optional region for S3-compatible storage
These S3 values can be overridden on a per-request basis in the request payload.
Optional Configuration
WEBHOOK_URL(string): Optional webhook to call after generation completion or failure
PYWORKER_REPO(string): Custom PyWorker git repository URL (default: https://github.com/vast-ai/pyworker)
PYWORKER_REF(string): Git reference to checkout from PyWorker repository
BENCHMARK_TEST_WIDTH(int): Image width in pixels for default benchmark only (default: 512)
BENCHMARK_TEST_HEIGHT(int): Image height in pixels for default benchmark only (default: 512)
BENCHMARK_TEST_STEPS(int): Number of denoising steps for default benchmark only (default: 20)
Store sensitive information like API keys in the ‘Environment Variables’ section of your Account Settings. These will be available in all instances you create.
Benchmarking
When a worker initializes, it runs a benchmark to validate GPU performance and calculate a performance score. This score determines how requests are distributed across workers.
Custom Benchmark Workflows
You can provide a custom ComfyUI workflow for benchmarking by creating workers/comfyui-json/misc/benchmark.json. Use the placeholder __RANDOM_INT__ in place of static seed values to ensure varied generations.
The __RANDOM_INT__ placeholder can also be used in any workflow you send to the worker. It will be replaced with a random integer for each generation, allowing for varied outputs without manually specifying different seeds.
Default Benchmark
If no custom benchmark is provided, the template uses Stable Diffusion v1.5 with ComfyUI’s default text-to-image workflow. Configure the benchmark complexity using the environment variables listed above.
How worker scores work:
Each benchmark has a baseline complexity score of 100 (representing 100% of the work)
A worker completing the benchmark in 100 seconds receives a score of 1.0 (processes 1% of work per second)
A worker completing in 50 seconds receives a score of 2.0 (twice as fast)
Faster workers (higher scores) receive proportionally more requests
Configure your benchmark to match your actual workload complexity. If your typical workflow is more complex than the default SD1.5 benchmark, increase BENCHMARK_TEST_STEPS proportionally.
Endpoints
The ComfyUI template provides endpoints for executing workflows and generating images. After obtaining a worker address from the /route/ endpoint (see route documentation), you can send requests to the following endpoints.
/generate/sync
The primary endpoint for submitting ComfyUI workflows. This endpoint accepts complete, user-defined ComfyUI workflows in JSON format and processes them synchronously.
Request Structure
Input
payload:
input:
request_id(string): Optional unique identifier for tracking the request
workflow_json(object): Complete ComfyUI workflow graph in JSON format
s3(object): Optional S3 configuration override
access_key_id(string)
secret_access_key(string)
endpoint_url(string)
bucket_name(string)
region(string)
webhook(object): Optional webhook configuration
url(string): Webhook URL to call after generation
extra_params(object): Additional parameters to include in webhook payload
If the API Wrapper detects that you have used a URL as an input image in your workflow, it will automatically download the image and modify the workflow to use the local path.
Example Request:
vastai-sdk
from vastai import Serverless
import asyncio

ENDPOINT_NAME="comfyui-json"

async def main():
    async with Serverless() as client:
        endpoint = await client.get_endpoint(name=ENDPOINT_NAME)

        # ComfyUI API compatible json workflow
        workflow = {
          "3": {
            "inputs": {
              "seed": "__RANDOM_INT__",
              "steps": 20,
              "cfg": 8,
              "sampler_name": "euler",
              "scheduler": "normal",
              "denoise": 1,
              "model": ["4", 0],
              "positive": ["6", 0],
              "negative": ["7", 0],
              "latent_image": ["5", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "KSampler",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "KSampler"
            }
          },
          "4": {
            "inputs": {
              "ckpt_name": "v1-5-pruned-emaonly-fp16.safetensors"
            },
            "class_type": "CheckpointLoaderSimple",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "Load Checkpoint"
            }
          },
          "5": {
            "inputs": {
              "width": 512,
              "height": 512,
              "batch_size": 1
            },
            "class_type": "EmptyLatentImage",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "Empty Latent Image"
            }
          },
          "6": {
            "inputs": {
              "text": "beautiful scenery nature glass bottle landscape, purple galaxy bottle",
              "clip": ["4", 1]
            },
            "class_type": "CLIPTextEncode",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "CLIP Text Encode (Prompt)"
            }
          },
          "7": {
            "inputs": {
              "text": "text, watermark",
              "clip": ["4", 1]
            },
            "class_type": "CLIPTextEncode",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "CLIP Text Encode (Prompt)"
            }
          },
          "8": {
            "inputs": {
              "samples": ["3", 0],
              "vae": ["4", 2]
            },
            "class_type": "VAEDecode",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "VAE Decode"
            }
          },
          "9": {
            "inputs": {
              "filename_prefix": "ComfyUI",
              "images": ["8", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "SaveImage",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "Save Image"
            }
          }
        }
        
        payload = {
          "input": {
            "request_id": "",
            "workflow_json": workflow,
            "s3": {
              "access_key_id": "",
              "secret_access_key": "",
              "endpoint_url": "",
              "bucket_name": "",
              "region": ""
            },
            "webhook": {
              "url": "",
              "extra_params": {
                "user_id": "12345",
                "project_id": "abc-def"
              }
            }
          }
        }

        response = await endpoint.request("/generate/sync", payload)

        # Response contains status, output, and any errors
        print(response["response"])

if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())
Outputs
id(string): Unique identifier for the request
status(string): Request status - completed, failed, processing, generating, or queued
message(string): Human-readable status message
comfyui_response(object): Detailed response from ComfyUI including:
prompt: The workflow that was executed
outputs: Generated outputs organized by node ID
status: Execution status with completion messages and timestamps
meta: Metadata about the execution
execution_details: Progress updates and timing information
output(array): Array of output objects, each containing:
filename(string): Name of the generated file
local_path(string): Path to file on worker
url(string): Pre-signed URL for downloading the generated asset (if S3 is configured)
type(string): Output type (e.g., “output”)
subfolder(string): Subfolder within output directory
node_id(string): ComfyUI node that produced this output
output_type(string): Type of output (e.g., “images”)
timings(object): Timing information for the request
Ensure that any models and nodes referenced in your workflow are already installed before sending a request. Use the Provisioning Script or build a custom Docker image to pre-install required models and nodes.
Testing Before Deployment
Although this template is designed for serverless deployment, you can test it as an interactive instance first.
To access ComfyUI and the API wrapper:
Start an interactive instance with this template
Connect via SSH with port forwarding:
ssh -L 18188:localhost:18188 -L 18288:localhost:18288 root@instance-address -p port
Access ComfyUI at http://localhost:18188
Access the API Wrapper documentation at http://localhost:18288/docs
The benchmarking process will be visible in the instance logs, but applications won’t be available over the public interface without port forwarding.</content>
ComfyUI Wan 2.2:
<content>The ComfyUI Serverless Wan 2.2 template allows you to send text-to-video generation requests to ComfyUI and have generated video assets automatically uploaded to S3-compatible storage. The template returns pre-signed URLs in response to requests, along with detailed process updates emitted by ComfyUI during generation.
Template Components
The ComfyUI Wan 2.2 template includes:
In the Docker Image:
ComfyUI
ComfyUI API Wrapper
Stable Diffusion 1.5 (for benchmarking)
Downloaded on first boot:
PyWorker (comfyui-json worker)
Provisioning Script for custom configuration
Adds cron job to remove older output files (older than 24 hours) if available disk space is less than 512MB
Adds benchmarking workflow file
Downloads Wan 2.2 models:
text_encoders/umt5_xxl_fp8_e4m3fn_scaled.safetensors
vae/wan_2.1_vae.safetensors
diffusion_models/wan2.2_t2v_low_noise_14B_fp8_scaled.safetensors
diffusion_models/wan2.2_t2v_high_noise_14B_fp8_scaled.safetensors
loras/wan2.2_t2v_lightx2v_4steps_lora_v1.1_high_noise.safetensors
loras/wan2.2_t2v_lightx2v_4steps_lora_v1.1_low_noise.safetensors
Before using this template, familiarize yourself with the Serverless Documentation and Getting Started With Serverless guide. Learn more about Wan 2.2 T2V A14B on Hugging Face.
Environment Variables
Required for S3 Storage
The API wrapper manages asset uploads to S3-compatible storage. Configure these variables in your Account Settings:
S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID(string): Access key ID for S3-compatible storage
S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY(string): Secret access key for S3-compatible storage
S3_BUCKET_NAME(string): Bucket name for S3-compatible storage
S3_ENDPOINT_URL(string): Endpoint URL for S3-compatible storage
S3_REGION(string): Optional region for S3-compatible storage
These S3 values can be overridden on a per-request basis in the request payload.
Optional Configuration
WEBHOOK_URL(string): Optional webhook to call after generation completion or failure
PYWORKER_REPO(string): Custom PyWorker git repository URL (default: https://github.com/vast-ai/pyworker)
PYWORKER_REF(string): Git reference to checkout from PyWorker repository
Store sensitive information like API keys in the ‘Environment Variables’ section of your Account Settings. These will be available in all instances you create.
Worker Startup Process
When a worker is first started with this template, the following will happen:
Docker image is downloaded if not already cached on the host machine
Worker (Docker container) is created on the host machine
Template on-start script is executed:
Docker image entrypoint is executed
Download and run provisioning script (remotely stored Bash script)
Start supervisord (ComfyUI & API wrapper process manager)
Current version of Vast PyWorker bootstrapping script is downloaded and executed
ComfyUI and API Wrapper become available
PyWorker begins benchmarking
Benchmarking completes and worker score is sent to the serverless system
When this process completes, the worker enters either the ‘Ready’ (hot) or ‘Inactive’ (cold) state.
Worker States:
Ready (hot): Worker is fully initialized and immediately available to process requests. You pay for idle time.
Inactive (cold): Worker is shut down to save costs. You pay only for storage.
Benchmarking
A Wan 2.2 video generation benchmark runs when each worker initializes to validate GPU performance and identify underperforming machines. The benchmark file is downloaded on first start and stored in the pyworker directory at workers/comfyui-json/misc/benchmark.json. The workflow is static but a random seed will be generated for each benchmarking run.
Performance expectations:
Benchmark duration should remain consistent across identical GPU models
Significant variation (>20%) may indicate thermal, power, or configuration issues
Understanding Worker Scores
The benchmarking system calculates a performance score for each worker that determines how requests are distributed:
How scoring works:
Each benchmark is assigned a baseline complexity score of 100 (representing 100% of the work)
If a worker completes the benchmark in 100 seconds, it receives a score of 1.0 (it processes 1% of the work per second)
If a worker completes the same benchmark in 50 seconds, it receives a score of 2.0 (twice as fast)
If a worker completes the same benchmark in 200 seconds, it receives a score of 0.5 (half as fast)
How this affects your endpoint:
Faster workers (higher scores) receive more requests proportionally
To serve 1 request per second on average with score-1.0 workers, you need 100 workers
With score-2.0 workers, you only need 50 workers for the same throughput
The system automatically balances load based on these scores
If you choose to use your own worker code, it’s recommended to implement a custom benchmark that closely matches the video generation workflows you intend to process.
Endpoints
The ComfyUI Wan 2.2 template provides endpoints for executing workflows and generating videos. After obtaining a worker address from the /route/ endpoint (see route documentation), you can send requests to the following endpoints.
/generate/sync
The primary endpoint for submitting ComfyUI workflows. This endpoint accepts complete, user-defined ComfyUI workflows in JSON format and processes them synchronously.
Request Structure
Input
payload:
input:
request_id(string): Optional unique identifier for tracking the request
workflow_json(object): Complete ComfyUI workflow graph in JSON format
s3(object): Optional S3 configuration override
access_key_id(string)
secret_access_key(string)
endpoint_url(string)
bucket_name(string)
region(string)
webhook(object): Optional webhook configuration
url(string): Webhook URL to call after generation
extra_params(object): Additional parameters to include in webhook payload
The string "__RANDOM_INT__" in your workflow will be replaced with a random integer prior to posting the workflow to ComfyUI, allowing for varied outputs without manually specifying different seeds.
Example Request:
vastai-sdk
from vastai import Serverless
import asyncio

ENDPOINT_NAME="comfyui-json"

async def main():
    async with Serverless() as client:
        endpoint = await client.get_endpoint(name=ENDPOINT_NAME)

        # ComfyUI API compatible json workflow for Wan 2.2 T2V
        workflow = {
          "90": {
            "inputs": {
              "clip_name": "umt5_xxl_fp8_e4m3fn_scaled.safetensors",
              "type": "wan",
              "device": "default"
            },
            "class_type": "CLIPLoader",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "Load CLIP"
            }
          },
          "91": {
            "inputs": {
              "text": "色调艳丽，过曝，静态，细节模糊不清，字幕，风格，作品，画作，画面，静止，整体发灰，最差质量，低质量，JPEG压缩残留，丑陋的，残缺的，多余的手指，画得不好的手部，画得不好的脸部，畸形的，毁容的，形态畸形的肢体，手指融合，静止不动的画面，杂乱的背景，三条腿，背景人很多，倒着走，裸露，NSFW",
              "clip": ["90", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "CLIPTextEncode",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "CLIP Text Encode (Negative Prompt)"
            }
          },
          "92": {
            "inputs": {
              "vae_name": "wan_2.1_vae.safetensors"
            },
            "class_type": "VAELoader",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "Load VAE"
            }
          },
          "93": {
            "inputs": {
              "shift": 8.000000000000002,
              "model": ["101", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "ModelSamplingSD3",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "ModelSamplingSD3"
            }
          },
          "94": {
            "inputs": {
              "shift": 8,
              "model": ["102", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "ModelSamplingSD3",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "ModelSamplingSD3"
            }
          },
          "95": {
            "inputs": {
              "add_noise": "disable",
              "noise_seed": 0,
              "steps": 20,
              "cfg": 3.5,
              "sampler_name": "euler",
              "scheduler": "simple",
              "start_at_step": 10,
              "end_at_step": 10000,
              "return_with_leftover_noise": "disable",
              "model": ["94", 0],
              "positive": ["99", 0],
              "negative": ["91", 0],
              "latent_image": ["96", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "KSamplerAdvanced",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "KSampler (Advanced)"
            }
          },
          "96": {
            "inputs": {
              "add_noise": "enable",
              "noise_seed": "__RANDOM_INT__",
              "steps": 20,
              "cfg": 3.5,
              "sampler_name": "euler",
              "scheduler": "simple",
              "start_at_step": 0,
              "end_at_step": 10,
              "return_with_leftover_noise": "enable",
              "model": ["93", 0],
              "positive": ["99", 0],
              "negative": ["91", 0],
              "latent_image": ["104", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "KSamplerAdvanced",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "KSampler (Advanced)"
            }
          },
          "97": {
            "inputs": {
              "samples": ["95", 0],
              "vae": ["92", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "VAEDecode",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "VAE Decode"
            }
          },
          "98": {
            "inputs": {
              "filename_prefix": "video/ComfyUI",
              "format": "auto",
              "codec": "auto",
              "video": ["100", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "SaveVideo",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "Save Video"
            }
          },
          "99": {
            "inputs": {
              "text": "Beautiful young European woman with honey blonde hair gracefully turning her head back over shoulder, gentle smile, bright eyes looking at camera. Hair flowing in slow motion as she turns. Soft natural lighting, clean background, cinematic portrait.",
              "clip": ["90", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "CLIPTextEncode",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "CLIP Text Encode (Positive Prompt)"
            }
          },
          "100": {
            "inputs": {
              "fps": 16,
              "images": ["97", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "CreateVideo",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "Create Video"
            }
          },
          "101": {
            "inputs": {
              "unet_name": "wan2.2_t2v_high_noise_14B_fp8_scaled.safetensors",
              "weight_dtype": "default"
            },
            "class_type": "UNETLoader",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "Load Diffusion Model"
            }
          },
          "102": {
            "inputs": {
              "unet_name": "wan2.2_t2v_low_noise_14B_fp8_scaled.safetensors",
              "weight_dtype": "default"
            },
            "class_type": "UNETLoader",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "Load Diffusion Model"
            }
          },
          "104": {
            "inputs": {
              "width": 640,
              "height": 640,
              "length": 81,
              "batch_size": 1
            },
            "class_type": "EmptyHunyuanLatentVideo",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "EmptyHunyuanLatentVideo"
            }
          }
        }

        payload = {
          "input": {
            "request_id": "",
            "workflow_json": workflow,
            "s3": {
              "access_key_id": "",
              "secret_access_key": "",
              "endpoint_url": "",
              "bucket_name": "",
              "region": ""
            },
            "webhook": {
              "url": "",
              "extra_params": {
                "user_id": "12345",
                "project_id": "abc-def"
              }
            }
          }
        }

        response = await endpoint.request("/generate/sync", payload)

        # Response contains status, output, and any errors
        print(response["response"])

if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())
Outputs
id(string): Unique identifier for the request
status(string): Request status - completed, failed, processing, generating, or queued
message(string): Human-readable status message
comfyui_response(object): Detailed response from ComfyUI including:
prompt: The workflow that was executed
outputs: Generated outputs organized by node ID
status: Execution status with completion messages and timestamps
meta: Metadata about the execution
execution_details: Progress updates and timing information with detailed progress_updates array showing generation progress
output(array): Array of output objects, each containing:
filename(string): Name of the generated file (e.g., “ComfyUI_00003_.mp4”)
local_path(string): Path to file on worker
url(string): Pre-signed URL for downloading the generated video asset (if S3 is configured)
type(string): Output type (e.g., “output”)
subfolder(string): Subfolder within output directory (e.g., “video”)
node_id(string): ComfyUI node that produced this output
output_type(string): Type of output (e.g., “images”)
timings(object): Timing information for the request
Example Response:
JSON
{
  "id": "66f4fac5-3f72-4390-b837-d3e4d961d4f9",
  "message": "Processing complete.",
  "status": "completed",
  "comfyui_response": {
    "b469e34f-eab3-43a9-ba64-60e4c60621de": {
      "prompt": [
        2,
        "b469e34f-eab3-43a9-ba64-60e4c60621de",
        {
          "90": {
            "inputs": {
              "clip_name": "umt5_xxl_fp8_e4m3fn_scaled.safetensors",
              "type": "wan",
              "device": "default"
            },
            "class_type": "CLIPLoader",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "Load CLIP"
            }
          },
          "99": {
            "inputs": {
              "text": "Beautiful young European woman with honey blonde hair gracefully turning her head back over shoulder, gentle smile, bright eyes looking at camera. Hair flowing in slow motion as she turns. Soft natural lighting, clean background, cinematic portrait.",
              "clip": ["90", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "CLIPTextEncode",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "CLIP Text Encode (Positive Prompt)"
            }
          },
          "104": {
            "inputs": {
              "width": 640,
              "height": 640,
              "length": 81,
              "batch_size": 1
            },
            "class_type": "EmptyHunyuanLatentVideo",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "EmptyHunyuanLatentVideo"
            }
          }
        },
        {
          "client_id": "worker_1_1759767551.908173"
        },
        ["98"]
      ],
      "outputs": {
        "98": {
          "images": [
            {
              "filename": "ComfyUI_00003_.mp4",
              "subfolder": "video",
              "type": "output"
            }
          ],
          "animated": [true]
        }
      },
      "status": {
        "status_str": "success",
        "completed": true,
        "messages": [
          [
            "execution_start",
            {
              "prompt_id": "b469e34f-eab3-43a9-ba64-60e4c60621de",
              "timestamp": 1759767867981
            }
          ],
          [
            "execution_cached",
            {
              "nodes": ["90", "91", "92", "93", "94", "99", "101", "102", "104"],
              "prompt_id": "b469e34f-eab3-43a9-ba64-60e4c60621de",
              "timestamp": 1759767867984
            }
          ],
          [
            "execution_success",
            {
              "prompt_id": "b469e34f-eab3-43a9-ba64-60e4c60621de",
              "timestamp": 1759768010485
            }
          ]
        ]
      },
      "meta": {
        "98": {
          "node_id": "98",
          "display_node": "98",
          "parent_node": null,
          "real_node_id": "98"
        }
      }
    },
    "execution_details": {
      "prompt_id": "b469e34f-eab3-43a9-ba64-60e4c60621de",
      "nodes_executed": ["95", "97", "100", "98"],
      "progress_updates": [
        {
          "time": 5.1010000000023865,
          "value": 1,
          "max": 10,
          "percentage": 10
        },
        {
          "time": 11.872999999999593,
          "value": 2,
          "max": 10,
          "percentage": 20
        },
        {
          "time": 133.73400000000402,
          "value": 10,
          "max": 10,
          "percentage": 100
        }
      ],
      "completed": true,
      "error": null
    }
  },
  "output": [
    {
      "filename": "ComfyUI_00003_.mp4",
      "local_path": "/workspace/ComfyUI/output/66f4fac5-3f72-4390-b837-d3e4d961d4f9/ComfyUI_00003_.mp4",
      "type": "output",
      "subfolder": "video",
      "node_id": "98",
      "output_type": "images",
      "url": "https://url-to-generated-asset"
    }
  ],
  "timings": {}
}
Ensure that the Wan 2.2 T2V A14B models and any required custom nodes are already installed before sending a request. This template pre-installs all necessary Wan 2.2 T2V A14B models during first boot.
Testing Before Deployment
Although this template is designed for serverless deployment, you can test it as an interactive instance first.
To access ComfyUI and the API wrapper:
Start an interactive instance with this template
Connect via SSH with port forwarding:
ssh -L 18188:localhost:18188 -L 18288:localhost:18288 root@instance-address -p port
Access ComfyUI at http://localhost:18188
Access the API Wrapper documentation at http://localhost:18288/docs
The benchmarking process will be visible in the instance logs, but applications won’t be available over the public interface without port forwarding.
About Wan 2.2 T2V A14B
Wan 2.2 T2V A14B is a text-to-video generation model that creates high-quality video from text prompts. The model uses a two-stage diffusion process with separate high-noise and low-noise models for improved video quality and temporal consistency.
Key features:
Text-to-video generation with positive and negative prompts
Two-stage diffusion process (high-noise and low-noise models)
Support for LoRA models for faster inference (LightX2V 4-step variants)
Configurable video dimensions (width, height, length)
Adjustable frame rate (FPS)
High-quality MP4 video output
Model architecture:
UMT5-XXL text encoder (FP8 quantized)
Wan 2.1 VAE for video encoding/decoding
Dual 14B diffusion models (FP8 quantized) for high-noise and low-noise stages
Optional LoRA models for accelerated inference
Learn more about Wan 2.2 T2V A14B on Hugging Face.</content>
ComfyUI ACE Step:
<content>The ComfyUI Serverless ACE Step template allows you to send text-to-music generation requests to ComfyUI and have generated audio assets automatically uploaded to S3-compatible storage. The template returns pre-signed URLs in response to requests, along with detailed process updates emitted by ComfyUI during generation.
Template Components
The ComfyUI ACE Step template includes:
In the Docker Image:
ComfyUI
ComfyUI API Wrapper
Stable Diffusion 1.5 (for benchmarking)
Downloaded on first boot:
PyWorker (comfyui-json worker)
Provisioning Script for custom configuration
Adds cron job to remove older output files (older than 24 hours) if available disk space is less than 512MB
Adds benchmarking workflow file
Downloads ACE Step v1 3.5B model (checkpoints/ace_step_v1_3.5b.safetensors)
Before using this template, familiarize yourself with the Serverless Documentation and Getting Started With Serverless guide. Learn more about ACE Step v1 3.5B on Hugging Face.
Environment Variables
Required for S3 Storage
The API wrapper manages asset uploads to S3-compatible storage. Configure these variables in your Account Settings:
S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID(string): Access key ID for S3-compatible storage
S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY(string): Secret access key for S3-compatible storage
S3_BUCKET_NAME(string): Bucket name for S3-compatible storage
S3_ENDPOINT_URL(string): Endpoint URL for S3-compatible storage
S3_REGION(string): Optional region for S3-compatible storage
These S3 values can be overridden on a per-request basis in the request payload.
Optional Configuration
WEBHOOK_URL(string): Optional webhook to call after generation completion or failure
PYWORKER_REPO(string): Custom PyWorker git repository URL (default: https://github.com/vast-ai/pyworker)
PYWORKER_REF(string): Git reference to checkout from PyWorker repository
Store sensitive information like API keys in the ‘Environment Variables’ section of your Account Settings. These will be available in all instances you create.
Worker Startup Process
When a worker is first started with this template, the following will happen:
Docker image is downloaded if not already cached on the host machine
Worker (Docker container) is created on the host machine
Template on-start script is executed:
Docker image entrypoint is executed
Download and run provisioning script (remotely stored Bash script)
Start supervisord (ComfyUI & API wrapper process manager)
Current version of Vast PyWorker bootstrapping script is downloaded and executed
ComfyUI and API Wrapper become available
PyWorker begins benchmarking
Benchmarking completes and worker score is sent to the serverless system
When this process completes, the worker enters either the ‘Ready’ (hot) or ‘Inactive’ (cold) state.
Worker States:
Ready (hot): Worker is fully initialized and immediately available to process requests. You pay for idle time.
Inactive (cold): Worker is shut down to save costs. You pay only for storage.
Benchmarking
An ACE Step music generation benchmark runs when each worker initializes to validate GPU performance and identify underperforming machines. The benchmark file is downloaded on first start and stored in the pyworker directory at workers/comfyui-json/misc/benchmark.json. The workflow is static but a random seed will be generated for each benchmarking run.
Performance expectations:
Benchmark duration should remain consistent across identical GPU models
Significant variation (>20%) may indicate thermal, power, or configuration issues
Understanding Worker Scores
The benchmarking system calculates a performance score for each worker that determines how requests are distributed:
How scoring works:
Each benchmark is assigned a baseline complexity score of 100 (representing 100% of the work)
If a worker completes the benchmark in 100 seconds, it receives a score of 1.0 (it processes 1% of the work per second)
If a worker completes the same benchmark in 50 seconds, it receives a score of 2.0 (twice as fast)
If a worker completes the same benchmark in 200 seconds, it receives a score of 0.5 (half as fast)
How this affects your endpoint:
Faster workers (higher scores) receive more requests proportionally
To serve 1 request per second on average with score-1.0 workers, you need 100 workers
With score-2.0 workers, you only need 50 workers for the same throughput
The system automatically balances load based on these scores
If you choose to use your own worker code, it’s recommended to implement a custom benchmark that closely matches the music generation workflows you intend to process.
Endpoints
The ComfyUI ACE Step template provides endpoints for executing workflows and generating music. After obtaining a worker address from the /route/ endpoint (see route documentation), you can send requests to the following endpoints.
/generate/sync
The primary endpoint for submitting ComfyUI workflows. This endpoint accepts complete, user-defined ComfyUI workflows in JSON format and processes them synchronously.
Request Structure
Input
payload:
input:
request_id(string): Optional unique identifier for tracking the request
workflow_json(object): Complete ComfyUI workflow graph in JSON format
s3(object): Optional S3 configuration override
access_key_id(string)
secret_access_key(string)
endpoint_url(string)
bucket_name(string)
region(string)
webhook(object): Optional webhook configuration
url(string): Webhook URL to call after generation
extra_params(object): Additional parameters to include in webhook payload
The string "__RANDOM_INT__" in your workflow will be replaced with a random integer prior to posting the workflow to ComfyUI, allowing for varied outputs without manually specifying different seeds.
Example Request:
vastai-sdk
from vastai import Serverless
import asyncio

ENDPOINT_NAME="comfyui-json"

async def main():
    async with Serverless() as client:
        endpoint = await client.get_endpoint(name=ENDPOINT_NAME)

        # ComfyUI API compatible json workflow for ACE Step
        workflow = {
          "14": {
            "inputs": {
              "tags": "funk, pop, soul, rock, melodic, guitar, drums, bass, keyboard, percussion, 105 BPM, energetic, upbeat, groovy, vibrant, dynamic",
              "lyrics": "[verse]\nNeon lights they flicker bright\nCity hums in dead of night\nRhythms pulse through concrete veins\nLost in echoes of refrains\n\n[verse]\nBassline groovin in my chest\nHeartbeats match the citys zest\nElectric whispers fill the air\nSynthesized dreams everywhere\n\n[chorus]\nTurn it up and let it flow\nFeel the fire let it grow\nIn this rhythm we belong\nHear the night sing out our song",
              "lyrics_strength": 0.99,
              "clip": ["40", 1]
            },
            "class_type": "TextEncodeAceStepAudio",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "TextEncodeAceStepAudio"
            }
          },
          "17": {
            "inputs": {
              "seconds": 180,
              "batch_size": 1
            },
            "class_type": "EmptyAceStepLatentAudio",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "EmptyAceStepLatentAudio"
            }
          },
          "18": {
            "inputs": {
              "samples": ["52", 0],
              "vae": ["40", 2]
            },
            "class_type": "VAEDecodeAudio",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "VAE Decode Audio"
            }
          },
          "40": {
            "inputs": {
              "ckpt_name": "ace_step_v1_3.5b.safetensors"
            },
            "class_type": "CheckpointLoaderSimple",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "Load Checkpoint"
            }
          },
          "44": {
            "inputs": {
              "conditioning": ["14", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "ConditioningZeroOut",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "ConditioningZeroOut"
            }
          },
          "49": {
            "inputs": {
              "model": ["51", 0],
              "operation": ["50", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "LatentApplyOperationCFG",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "LatentApplyOperationCFG"
            }
          },
          "50": {
            "inputs": {
              "multiplier": 1.15
            },
            "class_type": "LatentOperationTonemapReinhard",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "LatentOperationTonemapReinhard"
            }
          },
          "51": {
            "inputs": {
              "shift": 6,
              "model": ["40", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "ModelSamplingSD3",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "ModelSamplingSD3"
            }
          },
          "52": {
            "inputs": {
              "seed": "__RANDOM_INT__",
              "steps": 65,
              "cfg": 4,
              "sampler_name": "er_sde",
              "scheduler": "linear_quadratic",
              "denoise": 1,
              "model": ["49", 0],
              "positive": ["14", 0],
              "negative": ["44", 0],
              "latent_image": ["17", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "KSampler",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "KSampler"
            }
          },
          "59": {
            "inputs": {
              "filename_prefix": "audio/ComfyUI",
              "quality": "V0",
              "audioUI": "",
              "audio": ["18", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "SaveAudioMP3",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "Save Audio (MP3)"
            }
          }
        }

        payload = {
          "input": {
            "request_id": "",
            "workflow_json": workflow,
            "s3": {
              "access_key_id": "",
              "secret_access_key": "",
              "endpoint_url": "",
              "bucket_name": "",
              "region": ""
            },
            "webhook": {
              "url": "",
              "extra_params": {
                "user_id": "12345",
                "project_id": "abc-def"
              }
            }
          }
        }

        response = await endpoint.request("/generate/sync", payload)

        # Response contains status, output, and any errors
        print(response["response"])

if __name__ == "__main__":
    asyncio.run(main())
Outputs
id(string): Unique identifier for the request
status(string): Request status - completed, failed, processing, generating, or queued
message(string): Human-readable status message
comfyui_response(object): Detailed response from ComfyUI including:
prompt: The workflow that was executed
outputs: Generated outputs organized by node ID
status: Execution status with completion messages and timestamps
meta: Metadata about the execution
execution_details: Progress updates and timing information with detailed progress_updates array showing generation progress
output(array): Array of output objects, each containing:
filename(string): Name of the generated file (e.g., “ComfyUI_00006_.mp3”)
local_path(string): Path to file on worker
url(string): Pre-signed URL for downloading the generated audio asset (if S3 is configured)
type(string): Output type (e.g., “output”)
subfolder(string): Subfolder within output directory (e.g., “audio”)
node_id(string): ComfyUI node that produced this output
output_type(string): Type of output (e.g., “audio”)
timings(object): Timing information for the request
Example Response:
JSON
{
  "id": "bb655244-bc6a-4efe-8037-4ece54385f22",
  "message": "Processing complete.",
  "status": "completed",
  "comfyui_response": {
    "082ab76d-d286-4dc4-b628-b00030b151fd": {
      "prompt": [
        4,
        "082ab76d-d286-4dc4-b628-b00030b151fd",
        {
          "14": {
            "inputs": {
              "tags": "funk, pop, soul, rock, melodic, guitar, drums, bass, keyboard, percussion, 105 BPM, energetic, upbeat, groovy, vibrant, dynamic",
              "lyrics": "[verse]\nNeon lights they flicker bright\nCity hums in dead of night\nRhythms pulse through concrete veins\nLost in echoes of refrains\n\n[verse]\nBassline groovin in my chest\nHeartbeats match the citys zest\nElectric whispers fill the air\nSynthesized dreams everywhere\n\n[chorus]\nTurn it up and let it flow\nFeel the fire let it grow\nIn this rhythm we belong\nHear the night sing out our song",
              "lyrics_strength": 0.99,
              "clip": ["40", 1]
            },
            "class_type": "TextEncodeAceStepAudio",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "TextEncodeAceStepAudio"
            }
          },
          "52": {
            "inputs": {
              "seed": 655798145,
              "steps": 65,
              "cfg": 4,
              "sampler_name": "er_sde",
              "scheduler": "linear_quadratic",
              "denoise": 1,
              "model": ["49", 0],
              "positive": ["14", 0],
              "negative": ["44", 0],
              "latent_image": ["17", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "KSampler",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "KSampler"
            }
          },
          "59": {
            "inputs": {
              "filename_prefix": "audio/ComfyUI",
              "quality": "V0",
              "audioUI": "",
              "audio": ["18", 0]
            },
            "class_type": "SaveAudioMP3",
            "_meta": {
              "title": "Save Audio (MP3)"
            }
          }
        },
        {
          "client_id": "worker_1_1759925918.420156"
        },
        ["59"]
      ],
      "outputs": {
        "59": {
          "audio": [
            {
              "filename": "ComfyUI_00006_.mp3",
              "subfolder": "audio",
              "type": "output"
            }
          ]
        }
      },
      "status": {
        "status_str": "success",
        "completed": true,
        "messages": [
          [
            "execution_start",
            {
              "prompt_id": "082ab76d-d286-4dc4-b628-b00030b151fd",
              "timestamp": 1759933401519
            }
          ],
          [
            "execution_cached",
            {
              "nodes": ["14", "40", "44", "49", "50", "51"],
              "prompt_id": "082ab76d-d286-4dc4-b628-b00030b151fd",
              "timestamp": 1759933401522
            }
          ],
          [
            "execution_success",
            {
              "prompt_id": "082ab76d-d286-4dc4-b628-b00030b151fd",
              "timestamp": 1759933427895
            }
          ]
        ]
      },
      "meta": {
        "59": {
          "node_id": "59",
          "display_node": "59",
          "parent_node": null,
          "real_node_id": "59"
        }
      }
    },
    "execution_details": {
      "prompt_id": "082ab76d-d286-4dc4-b628-b00030b151fd",
      "nodes_executed": ["18", "59"],
      "progress_updates": [
        {
          "time": 0.112,
          "value": 1,
          "max": 65,
          "percentage": 1.54
        },
        {
          "time": 0.382,
          "value": 2,
          "max": 65,
          "percentage": 3.08
        },
        {
          "time": 16.972,
          "value": 65,
          "max": 65,
          "percentage": 100
        }
      ],
      "completed": true,
      "error": null
    }
  },
  "output": [
    {
      "filename": "ComfyUI_00006_.mp3",
      "local_path": "/workspace/ComfyUI/output/bb655244-bc6a-4efe-8037-4ece54385f22/ComfyUI_00006_.mp3",
      "type": "output",
      "subfolder": "audio",
      "node_id": "59",
      "output_type": "audio",
      "url": "https://url-to-generated-asset"
    }
  ],
  "timings": {}
}
Ensure that the ACE Step model and any required custom nodes are already installed before sending a request. This template pre-installs the ACE Step v1 3.5B model during first boot.
Testing Before Deployment
Although this template is designed for serverless deployment, you can test it as an interactive instance first.
To access ComfyUI and the API wrapper:
Start an interactive instance with this template
Connect via SSH with port forwarding:
ssh -L 18188:localhost:18188 -L 18288:localhost:18288 root@instance-address -p port
Access ComfyUI at http://localhost:18188
Access the API Wrapper documentation at http://localhost:18288/docs
The benchmarking process will be visible in the instance logs, but applications won’t be available over the public interface without port forwarding.
About ACE Step v1 3.5B
ACE Step v1 3.5B is a text-to-music generation model that creates audio from text prompts including lyrics and musical style tags. The model generates music up to 180 seconds in length with high-quality audio output.
Key features:
Text-to-music generation with lyrics support
Musical style control via tags (genre, instruments, tempo, mood)
Adjustable lyrics strength parameter
High-quality MP3 audio output
Supports up to 180 seconds of audio generation
Learn more about ACE Step on Hugging Face.</content>
Introduction:
<content>What is a Template?
A template is how Vast helps you launch an instance, setting up your rented machine with whatever software and formatting you need. Templates are generally used for launching instances through the web interface, but they can also be used in the CLI or through the API. In this document, we will focus on the web interface, but we will link to other relevant documentation throughout.
In the simplest technical terms, you can consider a template to be a wrapper around docker run. The template contains all of the information you want to pass to our systems to configure the environment.
You can browse the template section of the web interface at cloud.vast.ai/templates
Recommended Templates
We provide several recommended templates to help you get started. These are pre-configured environments that you can use as-is, or you can tweak them to your own requirements.
It’s a great idea to look at how these templates have been configured to guide you in creating your own.
Vast.ai Base Images
Our recommended templates are built on Vast.ai base images like vastai/base-image and vastai/pytorch. You can find the source code on GitHub.
These are large Docker images that contain CUDA development libraries, node + npm, OpenCL and other useful libraries. Despite their large size you’ll find they generally start quickly because they have been cached on many of the host machines.
Why use Vast.ai base images?
Faster cold boots due to frequent caching on host machines
Built-in security features through Caddy proxy
Automatic TLS encryption for web services
Authentication token protection for all services
Proper isolation between external and internal services
Instance Portal integration (explained below)
PROVISIONING_SCRIPT support for easy customization
Instance Portal
When you click the Open button on an instance running one of our recommended templates, you’ll see the Instance Portal:
Instance portal landing page
The Instance Portal provides easy access links to services running in your instance. It places an authentication layer in front of these services to prevent access by anyone who does not have the correct authentication token. You can also create tunnels to your services without exposing ports.
Full documentation for the Instance Portal is available in our Instance Portal guide.
Instance Setup
Docker Execution Environment
The standard and most common way to run instances on Vast.ai is using Docker containers. When you select a template, it launches a Docker container with your specified image and configuration.
Docker templates are ideal for:
Running pre-configured ML frameworks (PyTorch, TensorFlow, etc.)
Deploying web services and APIs
Development environments with Jupyter notebooks
Custom applications with specific dependencies
All of our recommended templates use Docker containers, providing isolation, reproducibility, and easy deployment across different host machines.
Virtual Machine Templates
In addition to standard Docker container templates, we also offer Virtual Machine (VM) templates. These launch a full virtual machine environment rather than a docker container.
When to use VM templates:
Run applications that require namespace support
Run more than one Docker container in an instance
Load kernel modules or run profiling jobs
Mount remote drives with rclone or similar
You can edit VM templates just like regular templates, but you should not change the docker image field. Only the images we distribute from docker.io/vastai/kvm will work.
Customizing Recommended Templates
To learn how to customize our recommended templates with provisioning scripts or build your own custom Docker images, see our Advanced Setup guide.
Next Steps
Quick Start
Run your first template in minutes
Create Templates
Build custom templates for your needs
Advanced Setup
Provisioning scripts and Docker customization</content>
Quick Start:
<content>Run Your First Template
To jump right in and run a template, follow these steps.
Visit the templates section of the console where you will find all of our recommended templates.
Recommended Templates
Browse through the templates until you find one that meets your requirements. In this guide we will use NVIDIA CUDA, which is the first on the list. It’s a great starter template as it just includes the CUDA development environment, plus a few extras to improve the user experience.
NVIDIA CUDA Template
Now, click the ‘play’ button. This will load the template and take you to the available offers.
Offers page with GPU filter active
There are filters available at the top of the page to help you target a particular GPU. You will also find many additional filters on the left of the page for more fine-grained control over the instances you find.
When you have found a suitable offer, simply click the ‘RENT’ button to create your new instance.
You can now visit cloud.vast.ai/instances where you will find your running instance. It may take a few minutes to be ready as everything is being set up.
Instance view with blue open button
When it is ready you will see the blue open button. This indicates that the instance is ready to connect.
The action of the open button depends on the template you have chosen - In this example you will be transferred to the Instance Portal. To learn how to configure Instance Portal links, see our Advanced Setup guide.
Next Steps
Now that you’ve run your first template:
Understand templates better - See Introduction to learn about templates and Vast’s template ecosystem
Create your own template - Follow our Creating Templates tutorial
Explore advanced features - Check out Advanced Setup for provisioning scripts and custom images</content>
Creating Templates:
<content>Introduction
Creating a template is simple - it’s just telling Vast.ai how you want your instances to be configured. This guide will walk you through creating your first template step by step.
Prerequisites
A Vast.ai account
SSH client installed on your local machine and SSH public key added in the SSH Keys tab in the Keys section of your console
(Optional) Install and use vast-cli
Ways to Create Templates
You have three options:
1. Edit an Existing Template (Recommended for Beginners)
Start with one of our recommended templates and customize it to your needs. This is the easiest way to get started.
Best for: First-time users, quick customization of existing setups
2. Create from Scratch
Click ”+ New” on the templates page for a blank template and configure everything yourself.
Best for: Users who know exactly what they need
3. Use an Existing Docker Image
Find a Docker image on DockerHub or another registry and create a template around it.
Best for: Users with a specific application in mind (e.g., nginx, postgres, a specific ML framework)
Tutorial: Create Your First Template
Let’s create a simple template together. We’ll edit the NVIDIA CUDA template from the Quick Start guide.
Step 1: Open the Template Editor
Go to cloud.vast.ai/templates
Find the “NVIDIA CUDA” template (or any recommended template)
Click the pencil icon to edit
Template editor showing Config tab
You’ll see two tabs: Config and ReadMe. Stay on the Config tab.
Step 2: Give Your Template a Name
In the Identification section:
Change the Template Name to something descriptive (e.g., “My First Template”)
Add a Template Description if you’d like (optional)
Step 3: Choose Your Docker Image
In the Docker Repository And Environment section, you’ll see the Image Path:Tag field.
You can use:
Any public Docker image (e.g., nginx:latest, postgres:14, python:3.11)
Vast.ai base images (e.g., vastai/base-image, vastai/pytorch)
Your own custom images from any registry
For this tutorial, keep the existing NVIDIA CUDA image or try nginx:latest for a simple web server.
For a complete explanation of all Docker settings, see our Template Settings guide.
Step 4: Add Ports (Optional)
If your application needs external access, add ports in the Ports section.
For example, if you’re running nginx, add port 80.
Step 5: Set Environment Variables (Optional)
If your Docker image requires environment variables, add them in the Environment Variables section.
Never put sensitive information (passwords, API keys) in template environment variables if you plan to make the template public. Use your account settings instead.
Step 6: Choose a Launch Mode
Select how you want to access your instance:
Jupyter + SSH - Best for interactive development (default for most use cases)
SSH only - If you don’t need Jupyter
docker ENTRYPOINT - If you want the container to run exactly as designed
For this tutorial, keep the default (Jupyter + SSH).
For detailed information about launch modes, see our Template Settings guide.
Step 7: Save Your Template
Scroll to the bottom and click one of the save buttons:
Create - Saves the template to “My Templates” for later use
Create & Use - Saves and immediately takes you to the offers page to rent an instance
Save buttons
Congratulations! You’ve created your first template.
Next Steps
Now that you know the basics, you can:
Explore All Template Options
See our Template Settings for complete documentation of every field in the template editor.
Add Advanced Customization
Learn about runtime customization and building custom Docker images in our Advanced Setup guide:
PROVISIONING_SCRIPT - Run setup scripts when instances start
PORTAL_CONFIG - Configure the Instance Portal
Base Images - Build custom Docker images with Vast.ai security features
VM Templates - When to use virtual machines instead of containers
Manage Your Templates
Learn how to update, share, and troubleshoot templates in our Managing Templates guide.
See Real Examples
Check out our GROBID example to see a complete template creation workflow for a real application.
Common Use Cases
I want to run a specific application (e.g., nginx, postgres)
Find the official Docker image on DockerHub
Create a template with that image path
Add required ports and environment variables
Save and launch
I want to customize a Vast recommended template
Edit one of our recommended templates
Add a PROVISIONING_SCRIPT environment variable pointing to your setup script
See Advanced Setup for details
I want to build my own custom Docker image
Create a Dockerfile (optionally FROM a Vast base image)
Build and push to a container registry
Create a template with your custom image path
See Advanced Setup for details</content>
Template Settings:
<content>Overview
This guide documents all settings and options available when configuring a template. Use this guide when you need to understand what a specific setting does or how to configure a particular option.
For a step-by-step tutorial on creating your first template, see Creating Templates.
For advanced customization techniques, see Advanced Setup.
Identification
The first section helps you to keep your templates organized.
Identification section of the template editor
Template Name
This will be displayed in bold on the template card. Choose something that helps you identify the template amongst your other templates.
Template Description
This field helps describe the function and purpose of the template. Completely optional for your own purposes, but very helpful if you intend to make this template public or share it with others.
Docker Repository And Environment
This is where you define the Docker image you want to run, along with any options we want to pass into the container.
Docker section of the template editor
Image Path:Tag
Here is where you can define the docker image to run. This field must be in the format repository/image_name:tag.
Many of our templates pull from DockerHub but you can use any container registry - Just remember to add the full path if you’re using an alternative registry. Eg. nvcr.io/nvidia/pytorch:25.04-py3
You can use any Docker image:
Public images from DockerHub (e.g., nginx:latest, postgres:14, python:3.11)
Vast.ai base images (e.g., vastai/base-image, vastai/pytorch)
Your own custom images from any registry
Images from alternative registries (GitHub Container Registry, Google Container Registry, etc.)
Version Tag
For many registries we are able to pull the available list of tags so this field allows you to quickly select another version.
There is also a special [Automatic] tag you can use. With this selected, the machine you choose for your instance will pull the most recent docker image that is compatible with that machine’s own CUDA version.
This will only work if the image tag contains the CUDA version string. For example: my-image-cuda-12.8 would be loaded on a machine supporting CUDA 12.8, but a machine with only CUDA 12.6 would pull my-image-cuda-12.6
Docker Options
This field is a textual representation of the ports and environment variables declared in the sections beneath it. You can edit it directly or you can use the page widgets.
This field will only accept ports and environment variables. Other docker run options will be ignored.
Ports
To access your instance via the external IP address, you will need to add some ports to the template. You can add both TCP and UDP ports.
When your instance is created, a port will be randomly assigned to the external interface which will map into the instance port you selected.
You can also use SSH to open a tunnel to access ports. Use a command like:
ssh -p [SSH_PORT] [USER]@[REMOTE_HOST] -L [LOCAL_PORT]:localhost:[REMOTE_PORT]
ssh -p 22 user@remote.example.com -L 8080:localhost:8080
The machine will forward traffic from the host machine’s public port to the container port you specified.
Environment Variables
Here you can add any environment variables that your docker image requires. Do not save any sensitive information here if you are planning to make the template public.
Place any variables with sensitive values into the Environment Variables section of your account settings page. They will then be made available in any instance you create, regardless of the template used.
Special environment variables like PROVISIONING_SCRIPT and PORTAL_CONFIG can be used to customize Vast templates - see our Advanced Setup guide for details.
You can find out more about port mapping and special environment variables in our Docker Execution Environment guide.
Select Launch Mode
Templates offer three launch modes you can select from. Our recommended templates will usually launch in Jupyter mode for easiest access, but you are free to choose whichever suits your needs.
Launch mode selection options
Jupyter-python notebook + SSH
When you run the template in this mode, we will install Jupyter and SSH at runtime. Jupyter will be available on mapped port 8080 and SSH will be available on mapped port 22.
Interactive shell server, SSH
As above, but SSH only with no Jupyter installation.
In both Jupyter and SSH mode, the docker entrypoint for your image will not be run. It will be replaced with our instance setup script so you should use the on start section (documented below) to start any services.
docker ENTRYPOINT
In this mode, your Docker image will run precisely as it is. We will not include any additional software or access methods. If your Docker image does not offer SSH or another appropriate interface, please select one of the alternative modes if you need to interact with the running instance.
An additional field will be shown when using this launch mode to allow passing arguments to the image entrypoint.
Field allowing for argument passing
On-start Script
Here you can enter a short Bash script which will be run during instance startup. It is only available when using the Jupyter or SSH launch modes, and is most useful for starting any services that your docker image would have launched if the entrypoint had been executed.
On-start Script
Additional On-start Script Examples
You can execute custom startup scripts:
chmod +x /usr/local/bin/start.sh
bash /usr/local/bin/start.sh
You can also overwrite existing files built into the image. Make sure you can switch to a user that has write permissions to that particular file.
For example, you can remove all instances of ‘-sslOnly’ in a particular file using sed:
sed -i 's/-sslOnly//g' /dockerstartup/vnc_startup.sh
You can also make directories:
sudo -i -u kasm-user mkdir -p /home/kasm-user/Desktop
Make sure to append environment variables to /etc/environment file in your on-start section because this makes environment variables available to all users and processes and ensures they are persisted even if your instance/docker container is rebooted:
env >> /etc/environment
Also make sure to find the image’s ENTRYPOINT or CMD command and call that command at the end of the on-start section. We overwrite that command to set up jupyter/ssh server, etc. under the hood.
Extra Filters
Use this area to place restrictions on the machines that should show up in the search page when the template is selected.
Extra filters showing this template is configured for both AMD64 and ARM64 CPUs
Docker Repository Authentication
If you are using a private Docker image then you will need to add authentication credentials so the machine running the instance can download it.
Docker Repository Authentication
Docker Registry Server Names
You don’t have to specify docker.io as the server name if your repository is Docker Hub. Docker automatically uses docker.io to pull the image if no other registry is specified.
You do have to specify your server name if your repository is something else. For example:
GitHub Container Registry (GHCR) - Server Name: ghcr.io
Google Container Registry (GCR) - Server Name: gcr.io
Disk Space
By setting the disk space in the template, you can ensure that new instances created from the template will use this amount as a minimum.
Template Visibility
Any template marked as public will be available in the template search system, while private images will not.
Private templates can still be used by others if you have shared the template URL.
Never save a template as public if it contains sensitive information or secrets. Use the account level environment variables as an alternative.
CLI Command
Templates can be translated directly into CLI launch commands. This read-only area shows what you would need to type or copy to the CLI if you wanted to programatically launch an instance this way.
Launch a template via the CLI
To learn more about starting instance from the CLI, check out our quickstart guide.
Save the Template
Finally, you can save the template. If you are creating a new template or editing one which is not associated with your account - Such as one of our recommended templates - The buttons you see will be labelled ‘Create’. For your own templates, you will see them labelled ‘Save’
Buttons for saving
The ‘Create’ button will create a copy of the template in the ‘My Templates’ section of the templates page for you to use later. The ‘Create & Use’ button will save the template, load it and then open up the offers page.</content>
Advanced Setup:
<content>Overview
This guide covers advanced customization techniques available on the Vast.ai platform. These features allow you to extend and enhance your templates beyond basic configuration.
For a complete reference of all template settings, see Template Settings.
For a step-by-step tutorial on creating your first template, see Creating Templates.
Customization Options
There are two main ways to customize templates on Vast.ai:
Runtime customization with PROVISIONING_SCRIPT - Add a setup script that runs when the instance starts
Works with any Docker image
Simplest approach - no Docker build needed
Perfect for installing packages, downloading models, configuring services
Build custom Docker images - Create your own Dockerfile with everything pre-installed
Can start FROM Vast base images for built-in security features
Or FROM any other base image
Full control, faster instance startup
Best for complex setups or frequently reused configurations
PROVISIONING_SCRIPT
Vast.ai templates support running a remote script on start to help configure the instance and download models and extensions that may not already be available in the Docker image.
This is the simplest way to customize a template - you start with one of our recommended templates (like vastai/base-image or vastai/pytorch) and add custom setup via a provisioning script.
How to use
Go to the Templates tab in Vast.ai interface
Search for “base-image” or “Pytorch” depending on your needs:
vastai/base-image is a general purpose image
vastai/pytorch is a base image for working with PyTorch-based applications on Vast
Click “Edit” on your chosen template
Add the PROVISIONING_SCRIPT environment variable:
In the Environment Variables section, add a new variable named “PROVISIONING_SCRIPT”
The value should be a URL pointing to a shell script (from GitHub, Gist, etc.)
Example URL
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/karthik-vast-ai/vast-cli/distributed-inference-integration/provisioning_script.sh
Make sure to click ”+” to add the environment variable
Click Create and Use
Add PROVISIONING_SCRIPT variable
Example PROVISIONING_SCRIPT
Bash
#!/bin/bash

#
cd /workspace/
# Cause the script to exit on failure.
set -eo pipefail

# Activate the main virtual environment
. /venv/main/bin/activate

# Install your packages
pip install your-packages

# Download some useful files
wget -P "${WORKSPACE}/" https://example.org/my-application.tar.gz
tar xvf ${WORKSPACE}/my-application.tar.gz"

# Set up any additional services
echo "my-supervisor-config" > /etc/supervisor/conf.d/my-application.conf
echo "my-supervisor-wrapper" > /opt/supervisor-scripts/my-application.sh
chmod +x /opt/supervisor-scripts/my-application.sh

# Reconfigure the instance portal
rm -f /etc/portal.yaml
export PORTAL_CONFIG="localhost:1111:11111:/:Instance Portal|localhost:1234:11234:/:My Application"

# Reload Supervisor
supervisorctl reload
This script will run on first boot to set up your environment. All installations should go to /workspace/ for proper persistence.
Configuring Application Access with PORTAL_CONFIG
The base-image template includes PORTAL_CONFIG for secure application access management. This environment variable controls how applications are exposed and accessed.
PORTAL_CONFIG structure
hostname:external_port:local_port:url_path:Application Name|hostname:external_port:local_port:url_path:Application Name
The structure of this variable is:
Each application is separated by the | character
Each application parameter is separated by the : character
Each application must specify hostname:external_port:local_port:url_path:Application Name
Example:
Bash
"localhost:8002:18002:/hello:MyApp|localhost:1111:11111:/:Instance Portal|localhost:8080:18080:/:Jupyter|localhost:8080:8080:/terminals/1:Jupyter Terminal|localhost:8384:18384:/:Syncthing|localhost:6006:16006:/:Tensorboard"
The hostname in Docker instances will always be localhost
Where the internal port and local port are not equal then Caddy will be configured to listen on 0.0.0.0:external_port acting as a reverse proxy for hostname:local_port
If the external_port and local_port are equal then Caddy will not act as a proxy but the Instance Portal UI will still create links. This is useful because it allows us to create links to Jupyter which is not controlled by Supervisor in Jupyter Launch mode.
url_path will be appended to the instance address and is generally set to / but can be used to create application deep links.
The caddy_manager script will write an equivalent config file at /etc/portal.yaml on boot if it does not already exist. This file can be edited in a running instance.
Important: When defining multiple links to a single application, only the first should have non equal ports - We cannot proxy one application multiple times.
Note: Instance Portal UI is not required and its own config declaration can be removed from PORTAL_CONFIG. This will not affect the authentication system.
Building Custom Docker Images
If you want to create your own custom Docker image, you can optionally start FROM one of our Vast.ai base images to get built-in security features and Instance Portal integration. See the Introduction for more details on why you might want to use Vast base images.
Building FROM Vast Base Images
Start with a Vast.ai base image or Vast.ai Pytorch base image in your Dockerfile:
Dockerfile
#For example
FROM vastai/base-image:cuda-12.6.3-cudnn-devel-ubuntu22.04-py313
# or
FROM vastai/pytorch:2.6.0-cuda-12.6.3-py312

# Install your applications into /opt/workspace-internal/
# This ensures files can be properly synced between instances
WORKDIR /opt/workspace-internal/

# Activate virtual environment from base image
RUN . /venv/main/bin/activate

RUN your-installation-commands
After building your image:
Build and push your image to a container registry
Create a new template and enter your custom image path in the Image Path:Tag field (see Template Settings)</content>
Managing Templates:
<content>Updating a Template
If you want to make changes to a template you previously saved, simply navigate back to the templates page and select ‘My Templates’. Here you’ll be able to make your changes by clicking the pencil icon.
My templates showing the NVIDIA CUDA - Demo template
Sharing a Template
It’s really easy to share your template with other users. We have two special links you can use and both include your referral code so you can earn if new users sign up - Find more about that here.
To share, click the three dots icon in the bottom right of the template card.
Menu shows sharing options
Copy referral link
This will copy a link that contains your referral ID, creator ID and the template name. It will always point to the most recent template you created with this name - Really useful if you want people clicking the link to always get the most recent version.
Copy template link 
This will copy a link containing your referral ID and the template hash ID. It points to this specific template at this point in time.
Templates all have a unique hash after every save. This is useful as it allows you to find a previous version if you have tracked the hash ID, but for sharing you probably want the referral link above.
Remember to add a comprehensive Readme to your template if you’re going to share it. This will help users to get started easily.
Troubleshooting
If your image is built for a different CPU architecture than your Vast machine, then it won’t work. You can try to find a machine with the required CPU architecture using our GUI or CLI.
If your image requires a higher CUDA version, then look for a machine with a higher Max CUDA version. The Max CUDA version can be found on the instance card.
If your image is built to run jupyter, then try running it on a port different than 8080.
If you are having issues using ssh launch mode, add your public key to ~/.authorized_keys, install openssh, start openssh when the container starts, and forward the ssh server’s port.</content>
Examples:
Creating Templates for GROBID:
<content>Introduction
This guide demonstrates creating a template using an existing Docker image. See our Creating Templates guide for more details on template configuration. We will be using the image from GROBID on dockerhub.
Find The Image and Tag You Want to Use
Step 1 - Find a Suitable Image
There are multiple GROBID images in dockerhub, but for this guide we will be using the official GROBID image.
Grobid Overview
Step 2 - Selecting the Version Tag
If you don’t already have a version you intend to use, we recommend selecting the latest stable version.
Stable Tag
At the time of writing, the current stable version is 0.8.0, so that is the version we’ll be using here.
Configuring The Template
Step 1 - Setting Your Chosen Image and Tag in Your Vast.ai Template
In the Docker Repository And Environment section, you will enter your image path and tag.
Imageandtag
Step 2 - Map Ports and Specify Your Image and Tag Combination
The overview page for this image at dockerhub has a link to their guide to using GROBID with containers, which you can read to get their recommendations for containerizing GROBID.
As we follow their guide to containerizing GROBID, we’ll need to make sure the container’s port 8070 is set to the host machine’s port 8070. We will do that in the Vast.ai template. We use -p 8070:8070 as one of the docker run options.
Run Cmd
Note: Vast only allows -e and -p docker run options to set environment variables and expose ports.
Grobidport
Step 3 - Select the Launch Mode
Here we will select the SSH launch mode.
Sshdirect
Step 4 - Look for CMD or ENTRYPOINT command
Found Tag
To find this for the template we are creating, we searched the image’s page in Dockerhub and found the CMD command in the Tags tab under the link “0.8.0” highlighted in blue.
Found Cmd
Step 5 - Fill Out On-start Script section using the CMD command we just found
Next, we add the contents of the CMD command to the end of the bash commands section of the On-start Script fields.
Also, appended environment variables to /etc/environment file in our on-start section.
This makes environment variables available to all users and processes and ensures they are persistent even if our instance/docker container is rebooted. We suggest doing the same for your templates.
Step 6 - Name and Save The Template
Grobidexample
When you are finished setting up your template, If you haven’t already done so, specify the template name and description.
Finally, click Create & Use to save the template and navigate to the GPU offers search page. You’ll notice that your template is selected and ready to be used.
Rent an Instance Using Your Template and Open GROBID Web App
Once you have selected an instance offer, You’ll click on the INSTANCES link in the left menu and see your rented GPU instance that has your template applied.
When the instance is done loading and the >_CONNECT state on the blue button appears, you should be able to see the ip range button at the top of the instance card.
If you click the IP range button you will see a new modal has the IP and port information for your instance. You’ll see the port 8070 that we set listed in Open Ports.
You can copy the machine IP and port and load the address (in this example: 195.0.159.206:55734) in a new browser tab or window. This address will load the GROBID web app.
Additional Resources
GROBID Documentation</content>
Account Settings:
<content>On this page you can view and edit important information about your client account.
Page Walkthrough
Enable Dark Mode
Turning the switch on and off will enable and disable dark mode.
Enable Dark Mode Section
You can also toggle this setting in the navigation bar with the moon and sun icons.
Account Security
In the Account Security section, you can set up two-factor authentication, resend a verification email, change your email, or reset your password.
Account Security Section
Two-Factor Authentication
You can set up two-factor authentication (2FA) for your Vast account. This can be used to help protect your account from unauthorized access. You’ll be required to enter a security code each time you sign in.
Two Factor Authentication
Resend Verification Email
Select the “Resend” button to receive a new verification email in your inbox.
Resend Verification Email
Change Email
You can view the current email connected to your account and change your email at any time by pressing the ‘Change’ button.
Change Email
When you change your email using this feature you will not be required to re-verify your email address. All emails that would normally be sent to the old e-mail will be now be directed towards your new email.
Reset Password
You can change your password by selecting the “Reset” button, and you will get a link to reset your password via email.
Reset Password
Referral Link
You can access your referral link in the Referral Link section of the Settings page.
Referral Link Section
When users create an account through your referral link and use Vast services, you’ll earn credits and receive payouts for your referrals.
Referral Link Fields
Environment Variables
You can add, edit, and delete the environment variables stored on your account in the Environment Variables section.
Env Section
When adding individually, input the env key into the key field and value into the value field, then select the ”+” button to save your environment variable.
Env Fields
To add multiple at once, select the “Batch Paste” option and paste your environment variables into that input, according to the format below.
Env Batch Paste
Within the batch paste mode, you can save your changes by selecting the “Save” button or erase them with the “Cancel” button.
When you are finished editing your environment variables, make sure you select the “Save Edits” button to save all of your changes.
Notification Settings
You can subscribe or unsubscribe from our email newsletter by selecting or unselecting this checkbox in the Notification Settings section.
Cloud Connection
In this section, you can integrate and connect with cloud providers such as Amazon S3, Backblaze, and Dropbox.
Cloud Connection Section
This integration process is very straightforward. If you need assistance in setting up these integrations you can read our guides here.
One of the benefits of these integrations is the ability to sync data even while instances are inactive.
Cloud Connection Fields
You can access this feature via the ‘Cloud Copy’ button on the Instances page.
Invoice Information
In the Invoice Information section, you can set personal information for your invoices.
Invoice Information Section
Click into any input field to edit it, and select the “Save” button to save your changes.
Invoice Information Fields
Common Questions
Can I delete my account?
You can now delete your Vast.ai account. Before deleting:
Remove all machines, clusters if you are a host.
vastai delete machine machine_id
vastai delete cluster cluster_id
Destroy / delete all instances and volumes.
Teams: If you own a team, it will be deleted — transfer ownership if needed. If you’re a member of a team, you’ll be removed from it.
After these steps, contact us via the Support Chat to complete deletion.
Is there a spend rate limit on my account?
There is a spend rate limit for new users. Make sure you have verified your email; otherwise, your limit is near zero. Once you have verified your email, your spend rate limit increases automatically over time. If you are an enterprise user, email us at contact@vast.ai to request a larger rate limit increase. Users paying with crypto are also eligible for rate increases.</content>
Billing:
<content>Overview
Vast requires pre-payment of credits for GPU rentals. Once credits are purchased, they appear in your account balance.
We accept credit card payments through Stripe and crypto payments through BitPay and Crypto.com. Use the add credit button to purchase credits one-time. Use the autobilling feature to have the system automatically top up your account using a saved credit card when it runs low.
Negative Balances
Once your credits reach $0.00, your instances, storage volumes, and data will be scheduled for deletion unless you add credits to make your balance positive again.
When your balance reaches zero (or below):
Your instances are stopped automatically.
While an instance is stopped, your instance is detached from its GPU(s), but your data can still be copied off the machine.
As with any stopped instance, you will continue to be billed for disk storage — even if your balance is negative.
To protect accounts with established usage history, the system allows a short grace period where your balance may go negative before deletion occurs — the length of this buffer is calculated based on your account’s average daily spend. Accounts with higher historical spend receive a proportionally larger buffer.
What happens next depends on whether you have a payment method on file:
If you have a credit card saved:
Your credit card will be periodically and automatically charged to cover any negative balance.
This protects your instances from being deleted and allows you to resume them without losing data.
If you do not have a credit card saved:
The system will have no backup payment method to charge, and will not be able to top up your balance.
Your instances and stored data will be destroyed to prevent indefinite unpaid usage.
Important: Instances showing in your account are never free, even if your balance is negative or zero.
Autobilling (credit card only)
Autobilling keeps your balance positive to protect your instances from interruption or deletion.

We recommend:
Set your autobilling threshold to approximately your average daily or weekly spend
Set a low balance email notification at around 75% of that threshold — this gives you an early warning if autobilling fails before your balance depletes to zero
WARNING
Even stopped instances continue to accrue storage charges. When your balance drops to your autobilling threshold or goes negative, your card will automatically be charged. Destroy instances you no longer need to avoid being charged for idle resources.
Even if you prefer to pay with crypto, saving a credit card as a backup payment method helps protect your instances from deletion if your balance reaches $0 or below.
Update Frequency
Balances are updated about once every few seconds.
Credit Card Security
Vast.ai does not see, store or process your credit card numbers, they are passed directly to Stripe (which you can verify in the javascript).
Refunds
After spending credits, there are absolutely no refunds.
For unspent credits, contact us on the website chat to request a refund. In most cases we can refund unspent credits. Unfortunately Coinbase Commerce does not support refunds, so there are no refunds possible for credits purchased via Coinbase Commerce (legacy).
Pricing
There are separate prices and charges for:
Active rental (GPU) (in $/hr)
Storage costs (in $/GB/hr)
Bandwidth costs (in $/TB)
You are charged the base active rental cost for every second your instance is in the active/connected state. You are charged the storage cost (which depends on the size of your storage allocation) for every single second your instance exists and is online (for all states other than offline). Stopping an instance does not avoid storage costs.
You are charged bandwidth prices for every byte sent or received to or from the instance, regardless of what state it is in. The prices for base rental, storage, and bandwidth vary considerably from machine to machine, so make sure to check them.
You are not charged active rental or storage costs for instances that are currently offline.
To see a pricing breakdown on your current instances within your Instance page in the console or from offers on the Search page you can hover over the price to see pricing details.
Price breakdown shown by hovering your cursor over the listed price
Payment Methods
We currently support major credit cards through stripe, and crypto payments through BitPay and Crypto.com.
Billing Page Walkthrough
In this section we will walk through your billing page, which you can access from the Account section of your sidebar while logged into your Vast account.
Credits Panel
Here you can see the current amount of Vast credits you have. This section also shows what you are currently spending on instances and storage volumes.
Credits Panel
Adding Credits
By clicking the Add Credits button in the credits panel, you can add payment methods, link accounts, and add credits to your Vast account.
Add Credits Form
Transfer Credits
From this section, you can transfer your personal credits to a different account or team.
Click the Transfer Credits button to open a pop-up. There, you can select the destination account or team to send the credit to.
To transfer credit to another user, you will need their email address. ⚠️ This action is irreversible, so please double-check the email before proceeding.
Transfer Credits pop-up
to transfer credit to a team, you should be a part of the team.
Transfer Credit to a team
To transfer credit from a team back to a personal account, you must be the team owner. You will need to switch to your team context and open Billing Page form there to see following pop-up.
Transfer Credits
Transaction History Table
At the bottom of your billing page, you will find an itemized table of your transactions on Vast. By default, the table is open to the Invoices tab, where you can see all manual and automatic billing records, as well as transfers and refunds.
The Invoices tab of the Transaction History table
You can also click the Charges tab to see an itemized table of all charges from your instances, storage volumes, and serverless workers. Clicking the dropdown arrow on any of these items will display a more complete breakdown of those charges by type, including GPU usage, reserved disk storage, and upload/download usage.
The Charges tab of the Transaction History table
You can also use this table to generate an invoice for all charges or transactions created during a custom span of time by clicking the Export button in the top right corner of the table. You can see more details about how to customize this invoice in the following section.
Invoice Information
To customize your business or personal details on your Vast invoices, you can go to your Account Settings where you will find a section “Invoice Information.”

There you can add the your details to be shown on invoices you generate.
Invoice Filled
Here’s an example that shows where and how the invoice information appears on generated invoices:
Invoice With Fill Circle
If you leave your Invoice Info blank it will default to your Vast account’s email address for the “Bill To:” information.
Common Questions
If I rent a server and delete if after 10 minutes will I pay for 1 hour of usage or 10 minutes?
You will only be charged for the 10 minutes of usage.
Can I get a refund?
If you pay with credit card you can get a refund on unspent Vast credits. We do not refund Vast credits bought with crypto.
Why have the prices changed?
Pricing is set by the host and is specific to each offer. You can refine your search and look for a machine that suits your needs here.
Why am I getting the error “No such payment method id None.” when I try to add credit?
Before buying credit with Stripe you must add a card!
Am I charged for “Loading” instances?
No, you are not charged when it says “Loading”.
What happens if my account balance is negative?
Once your credits reach $0.00, your instances, storage volumes, and data will no longer be guaranteed, and will be at risk of deletion. If you have a saved credit card on file, your instances may persist and later be resumed once your balance is positive again.
Why am I getting charge more per hour than expected?
You may be see your Vast credit decline at a greater rate than expected due to upload and downloads costs, which is not shown in your $cost/hr or $cost/day pricing breakdowns as it is charged on a usage basis and not a constant rate. You can find these rates for bandwidth usage in the Internet: section of the pricing details, which you can see when you hover over the price in the bottom right-hand corner of instance cards within the Instance console page. You can also see pricing detail before instance creation from hovering over the prices on the Search page.</content>
Referral Program:
<content>Turn your audience into earnings! Share your unique Vast.ai referral link (or a public template link), and when someone creates a new client account and buys credits, you get 3% of everything they spend — for the lifetime of their account.
Better yet, you can cash out 75% of those referral credits via Stripe Connect, PayPal, or Wise.
In order to receive payouts for referrals you MUST create a new account. You are unlikely to be able to receive payouts to any bank account outside Vast if the account you are using for referrals has ever rented instances or hosted machines
How It Works
Share Your Link – Post it on your site, in videos, blogs, or wherever your audience is.
They Join & Buy Credits – New users sign up through your link and purchase credits.
You Earn – Get 3% of their lifetime spend as referral credits.
Cash Out or Spend – Use credits on Vast, or withdraw up to 75% as cash.
If someone spends 1,000overtime,youget1,000overtime,youget30 in referral credits — forever.
Payout Rules — Important!
To receive cash payouts (outside of Vast), you must use a dedicated referral account:
If you’ve ever rented instances or hosted machines on an account, you cannot cash out until your referral earnings exceed your lifetime instance spend.
If you just want credits to rent Vast instances, you can use your main account.
Why a separate account?
It keeps your referral earnings clear and makes sure you’re payout-eligible.
Example:
You’ve earned $300 in referral credits.
Lifetime charges on your account: $855.
Since 300<300<855, you can’t cash out until referral earnings exceed $855.
Getting Your Referral Link
Create a new account for referrals.
Go to Settings → Referral Link.
Account Settings
Copy the link.
Share it!
Note: You can’t refer yourself or any account connected to you — those won’t earn rewards.
Using Templates for Referrals
Want to make referrals even easier? Use Templates page to create your template. A template can pre-load:
A Docker image
Launch mode(s)
Onstart script
Environment variables
Example: The Stable Diffusion template loads the image, sets up Automatic1111 WebUI, starts Jupyter, and preps the environment — ready to go.
Create your own template for a use case, set it to public, then share its template referral link. The link will have this format:
Note: You can’t refer yourself or any account connected to you — those won’t earn rewards.
Your audience clicks → Vast loads with your settings → they sign up → you earn.
Where to use it: GitHub repos, videos, blog posts — anywhere your audience needs a “click and run” setup.
Bigger Opportunities
For large-scale referral or marketing collaborations, reach us at support@vast.ai.
Common Questions
Where can I find referral link for my template?
Open your Templates page -> My Templates. On each template card, click the three-dot menu and select Copy Referral Link. This gives you a ready-to-share link that includes your referral ID and the template ID — perfect for sharing with your audience.
Template Card</content>
Keys:
<content>The Keys page helps you manage secure access to your Vast.ai account. Here, you’ll find different types of keys used for authentication and connection.
SSH Keys
You can add, edit, or remove your ssh keys in the SSH Keys section of the Keys page of your console.
SSH Keys empty section
Add a new ssh key by clicking on the +New button. Copy and paste your key into the input in order for it to be attached to your account. You can use this ssh key to log into instances remotely. More here.
Add SSH Key
Once the SSH key is saved, it will appear in the SSH Keys section and will be automatically added to your future instances.
You can edit an existing ssh key by clicking on the Edit button and changing the text.
Delete an existing ssh key by selecting the Delete button.
These ssh keys will be used primarily when accessing an instance. You must switch out your ssh keys on this page if you wish to connect easily via multiple machines.
API Keys
You can view, copy, edit, and update your API keys in the Keys section of the console. You will need an API key to access the Command Line Interface and the REST API.
To create an API key click on the +New button. It will trigger API key creation pop-up.
Here, you can select specific permissions and assign a name to the key (by default, all you account permissions are selected).
You can reset an API key by clicking the Reset button. A new key will be automatically generated. To remove a key, simply click the Delete button.
Session Keys
A session key is a temporary key that allows access to your Vast.ai account. These keys are automatically created when you log in and will expire in one week.
However, for security reasons, it’s important to review your session keys regularly. You can view a list of all active session keys and see which devices are currently logged into your account. If you notice any session keys that you don’t recognize, or if a device is no longer in use, you can delete those keys to immediately remove access. This helps keep your account secure and ensures only your devices remain connected.</content>
Troubleshooting:
<content>I stopped my instance, and now when I try to restart it the status is stuck on “scheduling”. What is wrong?
When you stop an instance, the gpu(s) it was using may get reassigned. When you later then try to restart the instance, it tries to get those gpu(s) back - that is the “scheduling” phase. If another high priority job is currently using any of the same gpu(s), your instance will be stuck in “scheduling” phase until the conflicting jobs are done. We know this is not ideal, and we are working on ways to migrate containers across gpus and machines, but until then we recommend not stopping an instance unless you are ok with the risk of waiting a while to restart it.”
All my instances keep stopping, switching to inactive status, even though I didn’t press the stop button. What’s going on?
Check your credit balance. If it hits zero or below, your instances will be stopped automatically.
I keep getting this error: spend_rate_limit. What’s going on?
There is a spend rate limit for new accounts. The limit is extremely small for unverified accounts, so make sure to verify your email. The limit increases over time, so try a cheaper instance type or wait a few hours. If you are still having trouble, use the online support chat in the lower right.
I tried to connect with ssh and it asked for a password. What is the password?
There is no ssh password, we use ssh key authentication. If ssh asks for a password, typically this means there is something wrong with the ssh key that you entered or your ssh client is misconfigured.
On Ubuntu or Mac, first you need to generate an rsa ssh public/private keypair using the command:
    ssh-keygen -t rsa
Next you may need to force the daemon to load the new private key, and confirm it’s loaded:
    ssh-add; ssh-add -l
Then get the contents of the public key with:
    cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub
Copy the entire output to your clipboard, then paste that into a new SSH Key in your Keys section. The key text includes the opening “ssh-rsa” part and the ending “user@something” part. If you don’t copy the entire thing, it won’t work.
Example SSH key text:
    ssh-rsa AAAAB3NzaC1yc2EAAAADAQABAAABAQDdxWwxwN5Lz7ubkMrxM5FCHhVzOnZuLt5FHi7J8zFXCJHfr96w+ccBOBo2rtBBTTRDLnJjIsKLgBcC3+jGyZhpUNMFRVIJ7MeqdEHgHFvUUV/uBkb7RjbyyFcb4BCSYNggUZkMNNoNgEa3aqtBSzt47bnuGqqszs9bfDCaPFtr9Wo0b8p4IYil/gfOYBkuSVwkqrBCWrg53/+T2rAk/02mWNHXyBktJAu1q7qTWcyO68JTDd0sa+4apSu+CsJMBJs3FcDDRAl3bcpiKwRbCkQ+N6sol4xDV3zQRebUc98CJPh04Gnc41W02lmdqGL2XG5U/rV8/JM7CawKiIz3dbkv bob@velocity</content>
Host:
Hosting Overview:
<content>Vast is a GPU marketplace. Hosts sell GPU resources on the marketplace. Hosts are responsible for:
Setup: installing Ubuntu, creating disk partitions, installing NVIDIA drivers, opening network ports on the router and installing the Vast hosting software.
Testing and troubleshooting all issues that can arise, such as driver conflicts, errors, bad GPUs, and bad network ports. Vast does not offer support for getting your machine working. Connect your Vast host account to our Discord to access our host-only discord channels to chat or seek help from other hosts on the platform.
Managing your offers, including pricing and offer end dates
Planning maintenance so that no active rental contracts are disrupted
Account setup and hosting agreement
You must create a new account for hosting. If you are using Vast.ai as a client, do not use the same account. A single client and hosting account is not supported and you will quickly run into issues.
Once your account is created, open the host setup guide. There is a link in the first paragraph to the hosting agreement. Read through the agreement. Once you accept, your account will then be converted to a hosting account. You will notice there is now a link to Machines in the navigation, along with some other changes. Your account can now list machines that are running the daemon software.
Machine setup
The host setup guide is the official documentation for setting up a machine on Vast.ai. Read through each section closely.
Common issues to check:
Make sure to test the networking. Clients require open ports to directly connect to the machine for most jobs.
Make sure to read the section on IOMMU if you have an AMD EPYC system.
Make sure to disable auto-updates so that your machine doesn’t drop a client job to update a driver.
Once you are ready to list your machine, come back to this guide to understand pricing and the rental contract lifecycle.
General concepts
Clients have high expectations coming from AWS or GCP. As a host, plan to offer 100% uptime for your machine during the rental period. Expect that the GPU is going to be used at close to max capacity for the rental period. Ensure that your Internet, power source and heat dissipation systems are all functioning and that you have thought through how hosting will affect each one of those items.
Offers and Rental Contracts
Hosts can create offers (sometimes called listings) through the CLI command list machine or the machine control panel GUI on the host machines page.
The main offer parameters include:
the pricing for GPUs,internet,storage
the discount schedule param which determines the price difference between on-demand and reserved instances
the min bid price for interruptible instances
the min_gpu param controlling ‘slicing’ (explained below)
the offer end date, which determines how long the offer accepts new rental contracts
The offer accepts new rentals until the offer end date. When a client rents an instance on your machine, a rental contract is created from your offer. If your machine has multiple GPUs and you’ve set min_gpu to allow slicing, multiple clients can rent from the same offer, each creating their own independent rental contract.
Once clients rent your machine, it is very important to honor the terms of each rental contract until its rental end date.
The Rental Contract
By listing your machine, you create an offer visible to potential clients. A rental contract is created each time a client accepts your offer by renting an instance. The rental contract locks in all of the offer’s terms at the time of rental — including pricing, the rental end date, and hardware specs — and those terms cannot be changed afterward. Each rental contract is independent — you may have multiple active rental contracts from different clients on the same machine, each with its own rental end date and pricing.
As the host, you are committing to provide the services as advertised in your offer:
the host must provide the hardware/services according to all the advertised specs
the hardware can not be used for any other purposes
the client’s data must be isolated and protected according to the data protection policy
the advertised services must be provided until each rental contract’s rental end date
For full details, see the hosting agreement.
Offer End Date
The offer end date is your commitment to how long you will keep the machine online and fully functional. The pricing you set is the rate you’ll be paid for that commitment. Together, these form the terms of your offer.
You can set the offer end date in the hosting interface by clicking on the date field under expiration, or via the end date field in the CLI list machine command. Make sure to set an offer end date before listing your machine, or the offer will remain open indefinitely.
How the offer becomes a rental contract
When a client rents an instance from your offer, all of the offer’s terms at that moment — the offer end date, the pricing, and the hardware specs — are locked into a rental contract. The offer end date becomes the contract’s rental end date (shown in the UI as “client end date”), and the pricing becomes the contract’s rate. Once created, a rental contract’s terms cannot be changed — not by modifying the offer, not by unlisting the machine, and not by any other host action.
Can I change the offer?
Yes, but changes only affect future rental contracts. Existing rental contracts keep their original terms:
Changing the price does not change the rate on any existing rental contract
Shortening the offer end date limits the commitment window for new clients, but does not shorten any existing rental end date
Extending the offer end date allows new clients to rent for a longer period
Unlisting the machine prevents new rental contracts entirely, but existing ones continue at their original pricing and rental end dates
You can also unlist and relist with entirely new terms (new price, new offer end date). New rental contracts will be created at the new terms, while old rental contracts continue at their original terms. This means a single machine may have active rental contracts at different prices and different rental end dates.
The latest rental end date across all active rental contracts on a machine is shown in the UI. You must keep the machine available until this date.
Example: Multiple rental contracts from different offers
You list a 4×A100 machine at $2.00/GPU/hr with an offer end date of March 31.
On January 5, Client A rents 2 GPUs. A rental contract is created at $2.00/GPU/hr with a rental end date of March 31.
On January 20, you decide to raise the price. You unlist the current offer and relist at $2.50/GPU/hr with a new offer end date of June 30.
On February 1, Client B rents the other 2 GPUs from the new offer. A rental contract is created at $2.50/GPU/hr with a rental end date of June 30.
You now have two active rental contracts on the same machine at different prices and different rental end dates. Client A’s contract stays at $2.00 through March 31. Client B’s contract stays at $2.50 through June 30. You must keep the machine online and fully functional through June 30 to honor both contracts. The UI shows June 30 as the latest rental end date on this machine.
Min GPU
When clicking on the set pricing button, there is a min GPU field. The min GPU field allows you to set the smallest grouping of GPU rentals available on your machine in powers of 2, or down to 1. For example, if you have an 8X 3090 and set min gpu to 2, clients can create instances with 2, 4, or 8 GPUs. If you set min gpus to 1, then clients can make instances with 1, 2, 4 or 8 GPUs.
On-demand Price
The on-demand price is the price per hour for the GPU rental. On demand rentals are the highest priority and if met will stop interruptibles.
Interruptible min price (optional)
The interruptible price allows for the host to set the minimum interruptible price for a client to rent. Interruptibles work in a bidding system: clients set a bid price for their instance; the current highest bid is the instance that runs, the others are paused. more info
Reserved Discount Pricing Factor
Reserved Instance Discounts are a feature for clients which allows them to rent machines over a long period of time at a reduced price. The Reserved Discount Pricing Factor represents the maximum possible discount a user can achieve on your machines.
The reserved discount pricing is determined by the hosts. If you intend to encourage a long term rental this is a factor that you may want to research. Use the filters in the UI to select reserved.
Once that filter is selected, hosts who offer that discount will become easily visible. Hover over the rental button to see the discount rates that are offered. The original vs. the updated price will be shown as denoted by a stikethrough in the original amount:
This discount is not static, but rather scales over time that the user rents the machine for. These values are determined by the individual host(s).
As a host, you can set this number yourself to 0 if you wish to opt out of this feature.
Volume Offers
In addition to GPU offers, hosts can create volume offers on machines. A volume offer is an offer for storage space, and can be priced separately from GPU offers. The space allocated for volume offers is in the same pool of space as that for GPU offers, meaning that space will not be subtracted from available offers unless it is in use. When a client rents a volume offer, they rent a subset of the total space set for the offer, up to the total amount.
Storage Usage
Allocated storage (that is, storage in use by client rental contracts) is subtracted from the total storage available on a machine, and split up proportionally among the machine’s GPUs in remaining GPU offers.
For example, on a machine with 1000Gb of disk available and 2 GPUs, a host can create a volume offer of up to 1000 Gb.
If they create a volume offer of 500 Gb, and it is not rented, the machine will be available for rent with 2 offers of 1xGPU 500Gb and 1 offer of 2xGPU 1000Gb.
If 200 Gb of the volume offer are rented, the GPU offers will reduce to 2 1xGPU 400Gb offers and 1 2xGPU 800Gb offer. The volume offer will still remain, as there is still available space, and update to offer 300Gb.
Similarly, if stored instances on the machine are taking up 800Gb, the volume offer will reduce to 200Gb.
If stored instances are only taking up 400 Gb, the volume offer will not update, as there is still enough space on the machine to cover the volume offer.
Listing Volumes
By default, volume offers will be listed with GPU offers at the same disk price for half of the available space on the machine. Only rented space will impact the amount of space available for GPU offers, not the space in the offer itself. You can control the amount of space listed with the -v CLI option, and the price of the space with the -z option.
Space is listed in Gigabytes, and price in $/Gb/Month.
Text
vastai list machine <machine_id> -v <space> -z <price> -g .5 -e "12/23/2027" -r 0 -m 1
You can also directly create a volume offer by running the vastai list volume command.
Text
vastai list volume <machine_id> -s <space> -p <price>
Volume offer end dates must align with GPU offer end dates. Setting an end date on a volume will not update if there is an existing GPU offer. Setting a GPU offer end date will update volume offer end dates.
Volume offers will be unlisted when the machine is unlisted. They can additionally be unlisted with the command:
Text
vastai unlist volume <volume_id>
Out of Sync Rental Contracts
When a client deletes a volume, the space is automatically freed on the machine. If the machine is offline at this time, there is a job that runs hourly to free the space. If for some reason this is not working, or if you want to free the space automatically, you can run the command
Text
vastai cleanup machine <machine_id>
This will automatically remove expired/deleted rental contracts from the machine, and available storage will update on offers.
Extending Rental Contracts
To extend the current rental contracts for all clients on a given machine, change the offer end date to a later time with the same or lower pricing.
If you have raised the pricing, you cannot extend the current rental contracts.
Testing your own machine
It is vital to test your own machine to ensure the ports and software is running smoothly.
Setup a separate client account
There are two supported ways to test your own machine. If you want to use the website GUI, you will need to setup a new account on a different email address, add a credit card and then find your machine and create instances on it like a client. This has the benefit of showing you the entire client experience. Testing the recommended Pytorch template is vital to ensure that SSH and Jupyter are working properly.
Use the CLI (preferred)
The preferred method of testing your own machine is to run the CLI. For Windows users, we suggest setting up WSL which will require you to install Ubuntu on your Windows machine and change your bios settings to allow virtualization. Then you can start an Ubuntu terminal and run the CLI.
To rent your own machine you will need to first search the offers with your machine ID to find the ID and then create an instance using that ID. The show machine command will show all your connected machines.
Text
./vastai show machines
Then for each machine id you will need to find the available instance IDs.
Text
./vastai search offers 'machine_id=12345  verified=any'
Replace 12345 with your actual machine ID in question. You can see the number of available listings as well as information about the machine. This is the fastest way to also see all the offers listed for a given machine. The website GUI stacks similar offers and so it is not easy to see all the listings for a given machine. That is not a problem for the CLI.
Take the ID number from the first column and use that to create a free instance on your own machine. This example loads the latest pytorch image along with both jupyter and ssh direct launch modes.
Text
./vastai create instance <ID> --image pytorch/pytorch:latest --jupyter --direct --env '-e TZ=PDT -p 22:22 -p 8080:8080'
You can then look at your instance tab to make sure that pytorch loaded correctly along with jupyter and ssh. Click on the <_ button to get the ssh command to connect to the instance. Test the direct ssh command. Click on the open button to test jupyter. If the button is stuck “connecting” then there is most likely a problem with the port configuration on the router in front of the machine. Once finished, destroy the instance.
Maintenance
The proper way to perform maintenance on your machine is to wait until all active rental contracts have ended or the machine has no running instances.
Unlisting the offer will prevent new rental contracts from being created, but does not affect existing ones. However if you have active rental contracts, you could set the offer end date to match the latest rental end date, allowing new clients to rent instances that end at the same date. Once the end date is reached, you can then unlist the machine and then perform maintenance.
Remember that a single machine may have multiple active rental contracts from different clients, each with its own rental end date. All rental contracts must be honored — you cannot take the machine offline until every active rental contract has ended.
For unplanned or unscheduled maintenance, use the CLI and the schedule maint command. That will notify the client that you have to take the machine down and that they should save their work. You can specify a date and duration.
Uninstalling
To uninstall, use the Vast uninstall script located at https://s3.amazonaws.com/vast.ai/uninstall.
Common Questions
How do I host my machine(s) on Vast? How can I rent my PC?
Hosting on Vast will require some Linux knowledge, as you will be maintaining a server. Our setup guide is here. After the first paragraph of the guide there is a link to the hosting agreement. Once you agree, your account will be converted to a hosting account. You can review our FAQ that answers many of your hosting questions.
How do I get an invoice?
You can create an invoice by going to the “Billing” page, and then click the box for “Include Charges” under “Generate Billing History”.
How do I check if my machine is listed?
If your machine seems unlisted, try this command vastai search offers 'machine_id=MACHINE_ID verified=any' to see if the CLI finds it. If there is a result, your machine is properly listed
Can you verify my machine?
Verification is conducted in a randomized and automated fashion. We only run manual verification tests are for datacenters and high end machines.
How does verification work?
Verification is mostly for higher end machines, mining rigs may never be verified. Verification is also based on supply vs demand and is machine/gpu specific. Right now the only machines which can expect fast verification are $10k+: H100 or A100 80GB - if not tested quickly in a day or so let us know. 8x4090, 4xA6000 - should be tested in less than a week, especially if you have a number of them The only manual verification tests are for datacenters and high end machines. For everything else we run more random auto verification roughly about once a week. For datacenter partner inquiries email us at contact@vast.ai directly.
How do I gain datacenter status?
To apply for datacenter status we have a number of requirements. There is a minimum number of servers and the datacenter where the equipment is located will need to have a third party certification such as ISO 27001. Please read the complete requirement list and application instructions here.
How do I uninstall vast from my machine?
You can use the uninstall script
Help I am getting this error on my machine?
For help with machine setup, specific questions about hardware, and for errors or other issues, go to our discord.
Why is my machine not listed?
You won’t be able to see it on the GUI right away, but you can search using the CLI.
Can I send a message to a client using my machine letting them know that I fixed an issue that they were having?
No, there is not an established process for hosts to message clients on Vast.
I fear I will decrease my reliability from restarting my machine and potentially lose my verification.
Your machine’s reliability does not directly affect your verification standing. Verification is independent of reliability. Though, whenever taking your machine offline and working on it you should procede with caution as it is easy to introduce new issues or errors that will cause your machine to be de-verified.
How much can I make hosting on Vast?
To get an understanding of prices, the best place is 500farms which is a third party website that monitors Vast listings. The link is here.
Why did the reliability on my machine decrease?
If the machine loses connection or if there is a client instance that does not want to start the machine’s reliability will drop.
How do I minimize my reliability dropping?
Do not take your machine offline. If you must take your machine offline, minimize the time you have it offline. Note: reliability takes into account the average earnings of the machine, and machines with less earnings get penalized less from offline time.
If someone has already used an image on my machine does redownload happen or is the system smart?
Prior images are cached.
My storage for clients is somehow full. I just have a few jobs stored in my server and most of them are old and didn’t delete once the job finished. A lot of them are really old, can I remove them to free up some space?
We suggest that you try cleaning up the docker build cache, as it sometimes frees up far more space than it claims. You can also clean up old unused images.
I can’t find my machine?
If your machine seems unlisted, try this command vastai search offers 'machine_id=MACHINE_ID verified=any' to see if the CLI finds it. If there is a result, your machine is properly listed.
Why can’t I see my machine on the Search page in the console?
There are over 10,000+ listings on Vast, and search only displays a small subset. You will usually not be able to find any one specific machine through most normal searches. This is expected and intentional behavior of our system. You can use vastai search offers 'machine_id=MACHINE_ID verified=any', to see your machine’s listing. If you want to get an understanding of the machines ranking above yours you can use very narrow filters to see what similar machines are ranking above you. For example, something like: vastai search offers 'gpu_name=RTX_4090 cpu_ram>257 cpu_ram<258' is a decently constrained search that will most likely include a given machine you are looking for (that fits these filters) amongst others that are similar. Keep in mind our Auto Sort that search offers defaults to is comprised of both ranking various factors as well as an element of randomness.</content>
Verification Stages:
<content>States & Lifecycle
States: Unverified → Verified → (potentially) Deverified → Unverified → …
Lifecycle: Machines automatically move between these states based on performance and reliability factors. Once verified, a machine will remain verified unless issues arise — such as failing health checks or reliability standards — which could lead to deverification.
How It Works
Verification is entirely automated by proprietary algorithms that assess each machine’s operational health and performance, incorporating supply-and-demand dynamics.
Only machines that meet the platform’s reliability and performance thresholds are eligible for verification. There is no manual intervention, ensuring consistency, scalability, and objectivity.
Host Responsibilities (Always)
Keep systems stable, well-cooled, and correctly configured.
Maintain compatible drivers/CUDA and dependable, symmetric networking.
Run jobs only through the Jobs tab or the create job CLI command.
When issues arise, fix them promptly—the automation will update status.
State Details & Guidance
Unverified
What it means: Newly added machines or machines under evaluation. The system hasn’t yet completed enough testing to confirm platform standards. This is not a judgment of quality—only that no platform guarantee exists yet.
Do
Pass the Self-Test
Maintain steady uptime during evaluation.
Ensure drivers/CUDA and networking are correctly installed and reachable.
Keep the environment clean; schedule work via Create Job only.
Avoid
Unnecessary reboots or configuration changes.
Unrelated background workloads that consume GPU/CPU/IO.
Minimum Guidelines for Listing on Vast.ai
In order to be listed on Vast.ai, the machine must follow these minimum guidelines:
Text
- Ubuntu 18.04 or newer (required)
- Dedicated machines only - the machine shouldn't be doing other stuff while rented
- Fast, reliable internet: at least 10Mbps per machine.
- 10-series Nvidia GPU or MI25 or newer Radeon Instinct series GPU or Radeon VII or Radeon Pro VII or Radeon RX 7900 (GRE/XT/XTX); or Radeon Pro W7900/W7800. Other 6000 series or newer Radeon RX/Pro W series GPUs may be supported; but may not be searchable using standard filters for AMD ROCm.
- At least 1 physical CPU core (2 hyperthreads) per GPU.
- Your CPU must support AVX instruction set (not all lower end CPUs support this).
- At least 4 GB of system RAM per GPU.
- Fast SSD storage with at least 128GB per GPU.
- At least 1X PCIe for every 2.5 TFLOPS of GPU performance.
- All GPUs on the machine must be of the same type.
- An open port range mapped to each machine.
Additional Requirements for Verification
In order for your unverified machine to be verified, it must also meet the following minimum requirements:
Text
- CUDA version greater than or equal to 12.0
- Reliability of 90%
- At least 3 open ports per GPU (100 recommended)
- Internet download speed of 500 Mb/s
- Internet upload speed of 500 Mb/s
- GPU RAM of 7 GB
- Passing the Self-Test
Note: High-end GPUs are more likely to be verified. Machines with datacenter GPUs such as B200, H200, H100, A100, etc., and those with premium GPUs such as RTX PRO 6000 WS, 8xRTX 5090, 8xRTX 4090, etc., receive prioritized verification processing due to their high demand and performance capabilities.
Tip: Meeting these minimum requirements makes your machine eligible for verification, but does not automatically guarantee verification. Read More about Verification
Verified
What it means: The machine passed automated checks for reliability, network stability, operational health, and performance. A Verified machine consistently delivers server services to platform standards.
Do
Monitor health (uptime, thermals, power) and respond to alerts.
Keep drivers/CUDA on compatible, latest stable versions.
Maintain stable, symmetric bandwidth.
Avoid
Downgrading hardware capacity (e.g., reducing GPU count, disk or RAM).
Allowing thermal, power, or bandwidth instability under load.
Deverified
What it means: A previously Verified machine no longer meets requirements. System continuous monitoring detects sustained degradation.
When will deverification happen?
When the hosting software detects an error, your machine is automatically — but temporarily — deverified. It will appear as Unverified in search results until the underlying issue is resolved.
How should I begin fixing it?
A red error indicator will appear on your machine in the Machines tab. Use this message to identify and investigate the issue in your logs or metrics.
Recovery: Fix the issue and restore stability; the system will automatically transition back to Verified once system confirms healthy operation. This process may take some time, as the system ensures that the issue is fully resolved before restoring verification.
Common causes
Network instability, closed ports, or low bandwidth.
Hardware/system errors (e.g., failing storage, insufficient PCIe bandwidth).
GPU issues (e.g., nvidia-smi/NVML failures, container device init errors).
Container launch failures or repeated runtime exceptions.
Detected abuse or policy violations.
Do
Investigate red error indicators quickly; review logs and metrics.
Validate thermal/power headroom and bandwidth under load.
Re-check health after changes to confirm resolution.
Avoid
Ignoring warnings or allowing instability to persist.
Reducing hardware below the created specification.
Note: If you’ve fixed the issue but the system doesn’t automatically detect the resolution, a Vast.ai team member may need to manually check that your machine is functioning correctly and clear the error.</content>
Understanding Verification:
<content>How Verification Works
Verification is fully automated and powered by proprietary algorithms that continuously evaluate each machine’s operational health and performance, dynamically adjusting assessments based on real-time supply and demand.
Only machines that meet the platform’s defined reliability and performance thresholds are eligible for verification.
This process involves no manual intervention, ensuring consistent, scalable, and objective verification across all systems.
To qualify, a machine must pass minimum baseline, and health/stability checks. Beyond that, the system evaluates four primary criteria (order not indicative of priority):
Note: Meeting the minimum requirements makes your machine eligible for verification, but it does not guarantee that verification will occur immediately. The final verification outcome still depends on the factors listed below.
1) Reliability
Definition: Stable, uninterrupted operation over time (uptime, resilience under continuous workloads).
Do
Maintain consistent uptime with minimal downtime.
Keep network connectivity stable; avoid jitter and drops.
Manage thermals and power to prevent throttling.
Proactively monitor hardware health and perform maintenance.
Avoid
Frequent restarts or unplanned outages.
Overheating, undervolting, or unstable power delivery.
Note: Higher reliability greatly improves verification likelihood. Sustained ≥99.99% (up to 99.9999%+) uptime is typically favored.
2) Infrastructure Configuration
Definition: Hardware, network, and software readiness to meet operational standards.
Hardware
GPU: Type, memory, and count matter. Newer datacenter/workstation GPUs are prioritized (e.g., B200 > H200 >> 5090 > 4070).
VRAM: More VRAM improves performance profiles.
GPU Count: For the same GPU type, more GPUs increase verification likelihood (e.g., 8×5090 >> 2×5090 > 1×5090).
PCIe Bandwidth: Adequate throughput is essential; bottlenecks depress DLPerf and overall performance.
CPU: Favor strong, server-grade CPUs; actual measured performance matters.
Storage: Both capacity and bandwidth (e.g., NVMe) impact responsiveness and reliability.
Network
High-speed, symmetric, stable bandwidth is favored.
Ensure required ports are open and accessible; a static IP helps.
Virtualization
Enabling VM support significantly improves verification likelihood.
Software
Drivers/CUDA must be correctly installed and compatible (use stable latest releases).
Keep systems clean; run workloads via Create Job only.
System Optimization & Upgrades
Balanced scaling matters (CPU/RAM/PCIe/bandwidth commensurate with GPU tier).
Do not reduce hardware after creation (e.g., fewer GPUs/RAM) – this will trigger Deverified.
Upgrades (adding GPUs/RAM) are allowed but may take time to reflect across the platform.
Do
Verify GPU PCIe connections provide full bandwidth and are not throttled.
Keep the latest drivers/CUDA aligned with workloads.
Confirm required ports and end-to-end reachability.
Avoid
Pairing high-end GPUs with under-provisioned CPU/RAM.
Letting hidden background services consume resources.
3) DLPerf Score
Definition: Estimated GPU performance on typical deep-learning tasks (e.g., CNN/Transformer training) for cross-hardware comparison. Higher DLPerf improves verification odds. Read more
Do
Use the latest compatible drivers/CUDA.
Eliminate PCIe, thermal, and power bottlenecks to maintain sustained clocks.
Avoid
Misconfigurations that suppress benchmark performance.
4) Supply & Demand Analysis
Definition: Ongoing evaluation of market trends and renter behavior to surface configurations most likely to be rented.
Implication: Machines aligned with active renter preferences—popular GPUs, sufficient VRAM, strong reliability, fast internet—are prioritized for verification to maximize utilization and profitability.
Do
Offer in-demand GPU models with adequate VRAM and balanced resources.
Maintain strong reliability to remain attractive once listed.
Avoid
Niche/mismatched configurations with low renter interest.
Quick Reference
Category What Matters Most How to Improve
Reliability Stable, uninterrupted uptime Proactive monitoring; steady power/thermals; minimize restarts
Network Symmetric, stable bandwidth; open ports Upgrade links; verify routing/ports; monitor jitter/loss
Hardware Modern GPUs/CPUs; adequate PCIe & RAM Favor DC/workstation GPUs; ensure PCIe lanes; match CPU/RAM to GPU tier
Storage Throughput and reliability Prefer NVMe; monitor SMART; ensure sustained bandwidth
Virtualization VM capability enabled Enable in BIOS; enable IOMMU.
Software Correct drivers/CUDA; clean system Install latest, stable, compatible versions; use Create Job only
DLPerf High real-world throughput Fix PCIe/thermal bottlenecks; maintain clocks; correct drivers
Supply & Demand Alignment with renter needs Choose popular GPUs/VRAM; balance specs; maintain reliability
Upgrades Changes reflected by platform Scale up (add GPUs/RAM); avoid reductions that cause Deverified</content>
How to Self-Test:
<content>Minimal Requirements for Verification
Before your machine can be verified on Vast.ai, it must meet all minimum quality and reliability benchmarks. Verification confirms that your machine is stable, performant, and properly configured to run client workloads.
Note: Meeting these minimum requirements makes your machine eligible for verification, but does not automatically guarantee verification.
About the Self-Test
The self-test helps confirm that your machine satisfies Vast.ai’s minimum performance and configuration standards. It automatically evaluates key system aspects and simulates real workloads to validate both hardware and network readiness.
What the Self-Test Checks
During the self-test, the following components and conditions are verified:
Driver setup (including CUDA configuration)
Network speed and stability
Open ports and connectivity
PCIe bandwidth
GPU VRAM capacity and reliability
System RAM and CPU performance
Overall machine reliability under simulated workloads
A short test workload will be executed to assess actual runtime performance.
Tip: Ensure no other jobs or instances are running during the self-test for the most accurate results.
Step-by-Step Guide
Step 0: Install the Vast CLI
Follow the official setup guide to install the Vast CLI: Vast CLI: Get Started
Step 1: Set Your API Key
1.1 Get your API key: API Keys Documentation
1.2 Authenticate your CLI with your Vast.ai account:
vastai set api-key <API_KEY>
Example:
vastai set api-key 123123123123123
Step 2: Run the Self-Test
Before running the test, make sure:
Your machine has been listed.
There are no active clients currently renting it.
Run the self-test command:
vastai self-test machine <machine_id>
Example:
vastai self-test machine 12345
Step 3: Review the Results
If the test passes, you’ll see:
Test completed successfully.
If the test fails:
The CLI will display detailed reasons for failure.
Apply the suggested fixes and rerun the test.
If the test says the machine is “not found or not rentable”:
Try un-listing your machine, then listing it again.
Ensure your machine has no missing data in your machines page, such as upload and download speed, RAM, or ports.
Optional: Ignore Requirements Mode
If your machine is rejected for not meeting requirements, but you still want to check its rentability or run the pressure tests, you can rerun the test with the --ignore-requirements flag:
vastai self-test machine <machine_id> --ignore-requirements
Example:
vastai self-test machine 12345 --ignore-requirements
Note: The --ignore-requirements flag runs the test in a relaxed mode, bypassing some checks. Even if the test passes in this mode, your machine does not meet the minimum verification requirements.
Important: Even with --ignore-requirements, your machine must have at least three direct open ports — otherwise, the self-test will fail.</content>
Datacenter Status:
<content>Equipment that is in a certified datacenter on Vast.ai is eligible to be included in the “Secure Cloud” offering and receive other benefits, such as the blue datacenter label. Individual certifications will eventually be highlighted so users can understand if a given host is compliant with HIPAA, GDPR, TIER 2/3 or ISO 27001. Users typically are willing to pay more for the security and reliability that comes with equipment that is in a proper facility.
Read through this documentation to understand the minimum requirements for becoming a datacenter partner and the specific verification steps that we will take to ensure compliance.
Benefits
Blue datacenter label on all GPU offers in the web interface for equipment that is in the datacenter
Offers are included in the “Secure Cloud” searches in the CLI and in the web interface
Increased reliability scoring
As a result of a few factors, generally higher search rankings in the marketplace
Direct Discord or Slack channel to Vast.ai for support
Requirements
ONE of the following third party certificates must be active:
ISO/IEC 27001
The equipment must be owned by a business
The business must be registered and up to date on all filings
The owners of the business must be listed on the registration or otherwise verifiable
The company must sign the Datacenter Hosting Agreement
The owner must undergo identity verification
The host must have at least 5 GPU servers listed on Vast.ai or otherwise show they have a significant (5+ Servers) amount of equipment to list
Application Process
In order to apply, you will need to first gather the required documentation:
Government issued IDs such as a passport for the business owner(s)
Business information such as a certificate of good standing or other recent record
The name and address of the datacenter where the equipment is located along with the relevant certificates
A contract or invoice from the datacenter linking the business
Other due dilligence documentation as required
Once you have the requiremed documentation, To apply please visit: https://vast.ai/data-center-application</content>
Earning:
<content>Overview
This page in the console allows you to manage your earnings from referrals. You can find more information about Vast’s referral program here.
Pages Walkthrough
The Earnings page gives you a transparent view of your referral program performance and accumulated rewards. Here’s what each section means:
Current Balance: This is the amount you’ve earned so far from your referred users but haven’t been paid out yet. It keeps growing as your referrals continue to use the platform.
Total Earnings: This shows your lifetime earnings the total amount you’ve earned from all your referrals since you joined the earnings program or started hosting. It includes both paid and unpaid amounts.
Total Referral Count: This number represents the total users you’ve referred who have successfully created accounts through your referral link. It’s a great way to track how your outreach is growing!
Total Rental Earnings (host only): This shows the total lifetime amount you’ve earned from your machine being rented out on the platform.
Total Referral Earnings (host only): This shows the total lifetime amount you’ve earned from all your referrals.
Additionally, there is the Earning Chart section that provides a clear visual overview of your earning history.
Earnings Chart
The Template Performance chart displays the earnings history from templates.
Payouts
You can view your payout history for a selected date range. Here you can generate and download invoices for your earning payouts.
Payout History
In the Payout Account section, you can set up a payout account.
Payout Account
Common Questions
How can I have earnings as a Vast user?
You can generate earnings by gaining Vast credit through template creation via our referral program. You can find more information about Vast’s referral program here.</content>
Host Payouts:
<content>Common Questions
When will I get paid?
It takes 2 weeks to get your first payout. The pay period ends and goes pending, then you are paid for that pay period the following Friday.
Why does it show paid on my invoice when I don’t see the payment in my account yet?
The paid status on invoices is marked as such when we send the payment list out to Paypal, Wise, Stripe, etc. This does not accurately represent the payment’s status within Paypal, Wise, Stripe, etc., bu rather shows the status of the payment solely within our system.
Can I generate an invoice?
You can create an invoice by going to the “Billing” page, and then click the box for “Include Charges” under “Generate Billing History”.
How much can I make hosting on Vast?
To get an understanding of prices, the best place is 500farms which is a third party website that monitors Vast listings. The link is here.</content>
Tax Guide for Hosts:
<content>Disclaimer: As an independent contractor, you are solely responsible for tracking your earnings and accurately reporting them in your tax filings. Vast.ai cannot provide tax advice, and we cannot verify the accuracy of any publicly available tax guidance. If you have questions about your tax obligations, please consult a tax professional.
Important: Vast.ai does not automatically withhold taxes.
International Hosts
Vast.ai does not provide tax documents or tax advice to hosts residing outside the United States. International hosts are responsible for understanding and complying with their local tax obligations.
United States Hosts
Depending on your payout method, your payment provider may issue a tax form if you meet their reporting threshold. It is your responsibility to:
Ensure your tax information is up to date with your payment provider
Confirm whether you qualify for a tax form based on your earnings and location
File your taxes accurately and on time
Contact your payment provider directly with any questions about your tax forms.
By Payout Method
Stripe Connect Stripe manages tax form delivery via Stripe Express. Log in to Stripe Express to confirm your tax information (name, address, SSN or EIN) is current. If you qualify for a form, Stripe will issue it directly to you. For questions, contact Stripe support.
PayPal PayPal issues tax forms to qualifying users directly through their platform. For information on thresholds and delivery, refer to PayPal’s tax help resources. For questions, contact PayPal support.
Wise If you are a US-based host receiving payouts via Wise, Vast.ai is required to collect your tax information directly. Please submit your W9 here: https://vastai.app.box.com/f/bff8fca18a3145beb34e8075ffa5dec3
If you are an international host receiving payouts via Wise, please refer to the International Hosts section above.
Common Questions
Does Vast.ai handle VAT?
Vast.ai is based in California and does not currently collect or remit VAT.
Is VAT shown on invoices?
VAT is not currently specified on Vast.ai invoices.</content>
Clusters:
<content>Introduction
Vast is introducing support for several features (local VPNs for client instances [in beta], network volumes [in alpha]) that depend on the host’s LAN configuration.
Hosts can now register a set of machines they own sharing a LAN as a cluster to allow clients renting their machines to access local network resources. This will allow their machines to support use cases such as multi-node training via NCCL; as well, this will be a prerequisite to listing network volumes when they are released.
A registered cluster is associated with:
A machine that acts as the manager node and is responsible for dispatching cluster management commands from the Vast server.
An IP subnet that machines in the cluster use to identify which network interface / which IP addresses for communication with other machines in the cluster.
A set of member machines.
The requirements for a set of machines to be registered as a cluster are that every member machine has a (non-NATed) IP address in the cluster’s subnet to which any other machine in the cluster can communicate with on all ports.
Cluster registration guide
Update to the newest version of the CLI: go to (https://cloud.vast.ai/cli/)[https://cloud.vast.ai/cli/] and copy+run the command starting with wget.
Identify and test the subnet to register:
On the manager node ---
Run ip addr or ifconfig (the ip utility is part of the iproute2 package).
Identify which interface correspond’s to their LAN. For most hosts this will be an ethernet interface, which have the naming format enp$BUSs$SLOT[f$FUNCTION]] in modern Ubuntu.
Hosts using Mellanox devices for their main ethernet connection may instead see their interface show up as bond0
Find the IPv4 subnet corresponding to that network interface —
In ip addr output, the third line for each interface usually starts with inet IPv4SUBNET where IPv4SUBNET has the format IPv4ADDRESS/MASK where MASK is a non-negative integer < 32.
Test that the other machines to be added to the cluster can reach the manager node on that subnet/address.
On the manager node:
run nc -l IPv4ADDRESS 2337 where IPv4ADDRESS is the IPv4 address component of the chosen subnet.
On each other node:
run nc IPv4ADDRESS 2337
Type in some test text (i.e., “hello”) and press enter
Check that nc received and outputed the test text on the manager node.
Run ./vast.py create cluster IPv4SUBNET MACHINE_ID_OF_MANAGER_NODE
Run ./vast.py show clusters to check the ID of the cluster you just created.
Run ./vast.py join cluster MACHINE_IDS where MACHINE_IDS is a space seperated list of the remaining machines to add to your cluster.
Cluster Management Commands Reference
./vast create cluster SUBNET MANAGER_ID
Initializes a cluster containing the machine with ID MANAGER_ID as its manager node and using the network interface corresponding to SUBNET
./vast show clusters
Shows clusters, for each cluster showing its CLUSTER_ID, associated SUBNET, manager node machine_id, and list of member machines.
./vast join cluster CLUSTER_ID MACHINE_IDS
Takes MACHINE_IDS as a space seperated list, and adds them to the cluster specified by CLUSTER_ID
./vast remove-machine-from-cluster CLUSTER_ID MACHINE_ID [NEW_MANAGER_ID]
Removes machine MACHINE_ID from cluster CLUSTER_ID. If the machine is the only manager, another machine in the cluster NEW_MANAGER_ID must be specified so that the cluster still has a manager.
./vast delete cluster CLUSTER_ID
Deletes cluster CLUSTER_ID. Fails if cluster resources are currently in use by client instances.</content>
VMs:
<content>WARNING: VMs interface much more directly with hardware than Docker containers. Proper VM support is very sensitive to hardware setup. This guide covers the configuration steps needed to enable support for Vast VMs on most setups, but is not and cannot be exhausitve.
Introduction
Vast now supports VM instances running on Kernel Virtual Machine (KVM) in addition to Docker container based instances. VM support is currently an optional feature for hosts as it usually requires additional configuration steps on top of those needed to support Docker-based instances.
Host machines are not required to be VM compatible; the Vast hosting software will automatically test and enable the feature on machines on which VMs are supported. On new machines the tests will be run on install; for machines configured before the VM-feature release, testing for VM-compatability will happen when the machine is unoccupied.
Machines that do not have VM support enabled will be hidden in the search page for clients who have VM-based templates selected.
VM Support Benefits/Drawbacks
Benefits
VM support will allow your machine to take advantage of demand for use cases that Docker cannot easily support, in addition to demand for conventional Docker-based instances.
VMs support the following features/use-cases that Docker-based instances do not:
Feature
Use-case
Systemd/Docker
Multi-Application Server Tooling and DevOps (e.g., Docker Compose, Kubernetes, Docker Build)
Non-Linux OSes
Windows Graphics (e.g., for rendering or cloud gaming)
ptrace
Program analysis for CUDA-performance optimization (e.g., via Nvidia NSight)
Currently no other peer-to-peer GPU rental marketplace offers full VMs; instead full VMs are only available from traditional providers at much higher costs. Thus we believe that hosts who have VMs enabled can expect to command a substantial preumium.
Drawbacks
Due to greater user control over hardware, VM support requires IOMMU settings for securing PCIe communications that can degrade the performance of NCCL on non-RTX 40X0 multi-GPU machines that rely on PCI-based GPU peer-to-peer communication.
VMs require more disk space than Docker containers as they do not share components with the host OS. Hosts with VMs enabled may want to set higher disk and internet bandwidth prices.
Summary
We recommend all hosts with single-GPU rigs to try to ensure VM support as the drawbacks for single-GPU machines are minimal.
We also generally recommend multi-GPU Hosts with RTX 40X0 series GPUs try enabling VMs, especially if they have plentiful disk space and fast (500Mbps+) internet speed, as rendering/gaming users will benefit from those, as well as users who need multi-application orchestration tools.
We do not recommend multi-GPU hosts with datacenter GPUs enable VMs until we can ensure better GPU P2P communication support in VMs, including support for NVLink.
Configuring VMs on your machine
Checking VM enablement status.
Run python3 /var/lib/vastai_kaalia/enable_vms.py check.
Possible results are:
on: VMs are enabled on your machine.
off: VMs are disabled on your machine. Either you disabled VMs or our previous tests failed.
pending: VMs are not disabled, but will try to enable once the machine is idle.
Disabling VMs.
To prevent VMs from being enabled on your machine, or to disable VMs after they have been enabled, run python3 /var/lib/vastai_kaalia/enable_vms.py off.
Note that default configuration settings for most machines will not support VMs, and we can detect that, so most hosts who do not want VMs enabled do not need to take any action.
Configuring your machine to support VMs.
Hardware prerequisites
You will require a CPU and a chipset that support Intel VT-d or AMD-Vi.
Configure BIOS
Check that virtualization is enabled in your BIOS. On most machines, this should be enabled by default.
Configure Kernel Commandline Arguments
For further reference refer to Preparing the IOMMU.
We will need to ensure IOMMU, a technology that secures and isolates communication between PCIe devices, is set up, along with disabling all driver features that interfere with VMs.
Open /etc/default/grub and add to the GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX= the following:
amd_iommu=on or intel_iommu=on depending on whether you have an AMD or Intel CPU.
nvidia_drm.modeset=0
Some hosts may also need to add the following settings:
rd.driver.blacklist=nouveau
modprobe.blacklist=nouveau
Then run sudo update-grub and reboot.
Disable display managers/background GPU processes.
If you have a display manager (e.g., GDM) or display server (XOrg, Wayland, etc) running, you must disable them.
You may not run any background GPU processes for VMs to work (nvidia-persitenced is OK, it is managed by our hosting software).
Enabling VMs
We will check/test your configuration when your machine is idle and enable VMs by default if your machine is capable of supporting VMs, and you have not set VMs to off.
If you have VMs set to off, and you’d like to retry enabling VMs, run sudo python3 /var/lib/vastai_kaalia/enable_vms.py on -f while your machine is idle.</content>
Teams:
Teams Overview:
<content>Introduction
Vast.ai’s Teams feature extends our powerful GPU compute services to collaborative environments. It allows multiple users to work together seamlessly in a shared space, managing serverless workers for AI Inference and GPU computing tasks collectively.
Key Features:
Collaborative Environment: Enable teams to work together in a shared space, managing resources and tasks collectively.
Resource Allocation & Management: Team managers can manage access among team members, ensuring efficient use of GPU workers. (In the future, resource allocation will also be in play)
Consolidated Billing: Simplifies the financial management by consolidating usage and billing across the team.
Performance Metrics & Access Controls: Each team member can access shared metrics and logs, with custom access controls set by team owners.
Getting Started with Teams
Ready to create your first team? Check out our Team Creation guide for a step-by-step tutorial on creating a team, inviting members, and assigning roles.
Creating Multiple Teams
Teams are created as separate accounts, allowing multiple teams to be created by a single user. Note: This feature is unavailble for Legacy Teams (accounts that were converted into teams directly). Each team operates independently, with its own members, roles, and permissions. Users can seamlessly switch between their personal and team accounts using the Context Switcher.
Independent Team Management: Each team has its own and members and roles.
Shared Resources: Each team shares resources such as instances, templates, machines, and certain settings with all team members.
Separate Billing & Credits: Teams maintain their own separate balance/credit, billing information, and payment history, separate from personal accounts.
Easy Switching: Users can navigate between personal and team accounts without affecting their workflow.
Conclusion
The Teams feature at Vast.ai is designed to bring a new level of collaboration and efficiency to your GPU computing tasks. Additionally, by bringing together the power of our Autoscaling system with these collaborative tools, your team will be well-equipped to tackle all kinds of complex, dynamic workloads effectively.</content>
Teams Quickstart:
<content>Introduction
This quickstart guide will walk you through how to create a team, invite new team members and assign them to different roles.
Creating the Team
There are two ways to create a team:
Click on your profile name (or email address) in the Context Switcher and then click the Create Team button
Or you can navigate to the Members section in the Sidebar and click Create Team
Create Team
Members Page
Once there, you can create your Team Name and transfer some credit to your team during creation. You can also skip the credit transfer step and do it later from the Billing Page.
To add credit during team creation, select Transfer my personal credits checkbox, enter an amount, and then click Create.
Team Creation
After successfully creating the team you should see your Team Name and role in the Context Switcher in the upper left corner and the Team Dashboard on the Members page.
Members Page
The Members section is the main way that team owners and managers can interact with the Teams ecosystem. From here you can invite team members, create/manage team roles, remove team members, etc.
Managing Team Roles
Every team comes with two default roles: manager and member.
Managers have full access to team resources, while members have limited read access to most resources while still being able to rent instances. Learn more.
To create a new role with your desired permissions, navigate to the Roles tab of the Members Page. Then you can name the role and choose the permission groups that the new role will have access to. Once you are satisfied, click Generate to create the new role.
Create Role with custom permissions
For more information on Permission Groups and what they allow access to, click here.
Inviting Team Members
To invite a team member, go to the Members Page and click on the Invite button.
This will bring up a quick popup where you can enter the email and team role for the person you want to invite. Once complete, click Invite to send the invitation email.
Invite Member
Once you send the invitation, the user should get an email asking them to join your team. Upon clicking the link in the email they will be added as a member of your team.
Note: if the recipient of the invitation does not have a Vast account, they will need to create one before being added to your Team.
Once the invitee has joined your team, you should see them listed in the Members section.
Team Members
Using SSH Keys with Team Instances
If you are part of a team and want to connect to a team’s instance using SSH, simply add your key to your individual account keys. Here’s how it works depending on the type of instance:
🔹 VM Instances
Your SSH key must be added to your personal account before the VM is created.
When the VM is launched, all SSH keys in your account are automatically included for access a team instance.
🔹 Non-VM Instances
You can either:
Add your SSH key directly to the instance, or
Add your key to your personal account, in which case it will be automatically applied to the team instance as well.
Conclusion
You have now successfully created a team!
From this point, you can add any Billing information the same way as a regular account and invite as many of your teammates as you like so you can collaborate together with ease.</content>
Managing Your Team:
<content>This guide covers all the operations you’ll need to manage your team after creation, including inviting members, managing roles, editing settings, and more.
The Members Page
The Members page is the main hub for managing your team. Here you can view team members, assign roles, invite new members, and access team settings.
Here’s an example of what a Members page looks like in the console:
From this page, you can:
View all team members and their assigned roles
Change member roles by clicking the directional arrow
Remove team members
Invite new members
Access team settings (three-dot menu)
Inviting Team Members
To invite a team member, go to the Members Page and click on the Invite button.
This will bring up a popup where you can enter the email and team role for the person you want to invite. Once complete, click Invite to send the invitation email.
Invite Member
Anyone with the proper permissions (currently team_write) can send invitations to invite team members at any role level.
Accepting Team Invitations
Receiving the Invitation Email: Invitees will receive an email containing a unique team invitation link.
Completing the Joining Process: Clicking the link will initiate a set of operations to add the invitee to the team. This may involve signing into the Vast.ai platform or creating an account if necessary.
Confirmation of Membership: Once the process is complete, the new member will be officially added to the team and will have access based on their role.
Note: If the recipient of the invitation does not have a Vast account, they will need to create one before being added to your Team.
Best Practices for Invitations
Ensure Accurate Email Address: Double-check the email address before sending invitations to avoid any miscommunication.
Communicate with Invitees: Inform potential team members that they will be receiving an invitation and what steps they need to follow.
Follow-up on Pending Invitations: Keep track of sent invitations and follow up with invitees who haven’t joined yet. Note: Team Invitations will expire after 4 hours.
Managing Member Roles
You can change a member’s role by clicking on the directional arrow next to their name and selecting a new role.
Change Roles
Every team comes with two default roles:
Manager: Full access to team resources
Member: Limited read access to most resources while still being able to rent instances
For detailed information about creating custom roles with specific permissions, see the Teams Roles documentation.
Editing Team Settings
Change Team Name
You must be a team owner or team manager to update the team name. Here is how to do it:
Switch to Team Context by clicking your profile in the top-left corner
Select the team you want to manage
Open the Members Page
Click the three-dot menu and select ‘Edit Team Name’
The ‘Edit team name’ option opens a pop-up that allows you to enter and save a new team name.
Edit team
Transferring Team Ownership
The Transfer Team Ownership feature allows an owner to seamlessly reassign the team to another member within it. To do so, navigate to the Members page and click the three-dot menu in the upper right corner.
Three-dot menu
From there, you can click Transfer Team Ownership and open a pop-up, select a new owner (who must already be a member of the team), and confirm the transfer. Once confirmed, ownership will be reassigned, and your role will be changed to a manager.
Transfer Team Ownership pop-up
Removing Team Members
You can remove a team member by clicking on ‘Delete’ next to their name, which will trigger a confirmation pop-up.
Remove Member
Deleting a Team
Only the Team Owner can delete a team.
To delete a team, open the three-dot menu on the Members page and select ‘Delete team’. Make sure you have deleted all instances from the Instances page, or all machines from the Machines page (if you are a host), before proceeding.
⚠ Warning: This action is permanent and cannot be undone. All team members will be removed and any remaining credits will be returned to your personal account.</content>
Teams Roles:
<content>What Are Team Roles?
Team roles in Vast.ai’s platform are designed to streamline collaboration and enhance security by assigning specific permissions and access levels to different members of a team. These roles determine what actions a team member can perform and what data they can access within the team’s shared workspace/context.
Types of Team Roles
Default Roles: These are the standard roles with preset permissions, suitable for common team structures:
Owner: Full access to all team resources, settings, and member management.
Manager: All permissions of Team Owner apart from Team Deletion.
Member: Has ability to view, create, and interact with instances, but no access to billing info, team management, autoscaler, machines, etc.
Custom Roles: Custom roles allow team managers to create roles with custom, tailored permissions via permission groups. This feature is particularly useful for teams with unique workflow requirements or specific security protocols.
For more information on Permission Groups and what they allow access to, click here.
Creating Custom Roles
Accessing Role Management: Custom roles can be created and managed through the Roles tab of the Members Page on the Vast.ai platform.
Defining Permissions: When creating a custom role, you can select from a wide range of read/write permissions, such as instance creation, billing access, etc. This allows for precise control over what each role can and cannot do.
Assigning Custom Roles: Once a custom role is created, it can be assigned to team members through the team management interface.
You can create roles either in the Vast CLI or on your team dashbaord if you have permission to create roles within your team (team_write).
Default Roles
You can easily edit any roles on your team using the team dashboard. When editing a role you should see the same series of checkboxes and categories as before.
Edit Role
Role Syntax
All team roles are created through the team dashboard using the role editor. You can also create roles through the Vast CLI by passing in a permissions JSON object that delegates what group of endpoints can be accessed.
Currently, the system only supports groups of endpoint categories, but soon it will be extended for further granularity.
The current activated scopes are as follows
misc: Supports uncategorized operations like search offers, getting logs from various sources, etc
user_read: Allows the usage of obtaining basic user data like email, credits, etc. Essential for web usage.
user_write: Allows the ability to change account settings such as email, password, 2FA, etc.
instance_read: Grants ability to view instances, and certain read-only instance operations
instance_write: Grants access to instances and all relevant operations such as starting/stopping instances, cloud copy, reserving credits, etc
billing_read: Ability to view billing page and get billing information
billing_write: Ability to change billing page information
machine_read: Read access to machines owned by the team
machine_write: Ability to add/remove machines, and also edit machine settings
An example of a permissions json would look like this:
Text
{
    "api": {
        "misc": {}, 
        "user_read":{}, 
        "instance_read": {}, 
        "instance_write": {},
        "team_read": {
            "api.team.members": {}
        }
    }
}
In order to create a granular team roles you must either use the CLI or the API. In the above example, the only API under team_read that the user would have access to would be viewing the list of team members.
For more information on Permissions click here.
Best Practices for Using Team Roles
Clear Role Definitions: Clearly define the responsibilities and permissions for each role to avoid confusion and ensure effective collaboration.
Use Custom Roles Judiciously: Create custom roles when predefined roles do not meet your specific needs. Be mindful of the permissions assigned to ensure team security and efficiency.
Conclusion
Team roles are a fundamental aspect of managing a secure environment for collaboration on the Vast.ai platform. By effectively utilizing predefined and custom roles, teams can ensure that each member has the appropriate level of access and control, fostering a productive and secure working environment.</content>
Legacy Teams:
<content>Overview
Originally, the process of creating a team involved converting a user’s personal account into a special team account. This legacy method has now been replaced with the ability to create separate team accounts.
Reminders for Legacy Team Accounts
Irreversible Process: Once a user account has been converted into a team account, the change is permanent and cannot be reversed.
Inheritance of Account Attributes: The converted team account inherits all aspects of your existing personal account, including billing information, cloud services, and any other account settings.</content>

